ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  SECTION 23 05 01 -MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL COORDINATION PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RESPONSIBILITY A. The Divisions 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27 and28 contractor(s) shall comply with the provisions of this section. The Divisions 21, 22, 23 and25 contractor(s) shall verify electrical service provided by the electrical contractor before ordering any mechanical equipment requiring electrical connections. Provide submittals of all mechanical equipment to Division 26, 27 and 28 contractor(s). B. The ElectricalContractor andMechanicalContractor shallbe responsible for coordinating any work requiring communication with the BMS, metering, monitoring, or other communication system. Electrical Contractor shall provide required communication protocol, ports, and wiring as requiredfor connection of metering, ATS, UPS, etc to the BMS or other communication system. C. The final responsibilityfor properly coordinating the electrical work of this section shallbelong to the Divisions 21, 22, 23 and 25 System Contractor performing the work, which requires the electrical power. 1. EachDivisions 21, 22, 23 and25 contractor shallbe responsible for providingpower wiringfor certain devices as describedin the specifications and on the drawings. This work shall be providedby alicensed electrician in accordance with all of the applicable provisions of the Division 26, 27 and 28 specifications, NEC and local codes. 1.2 WORK INCLUDED A. Carefully coordinate the interface between Divisions 21 through23(Mechanical) andDivisions 26 through 28 (Electrical), and Division 23 and 25(control)before submitting any equipment for review or commencinginstallation. 1.3 DEFINITIONS A. Automatic: Pertaining to afunction, operation, process or device that, under specified conditions, functions without intervention by human operator. B. Disconnect Switch: Amechanical switchingdevice usedfor changing the connections in a circuit, or for isolating a circuit or equipment from a power source. C. Motor Control Center: A floor mounted assembly of one or more enclosed vertical sections having a common horizontal power bus andprimarily containing motor starting units. D. ControlCircuit/Power: The circuit which carries the electrical signals of acontrol apparatus or system directing the performance of the controller but does not carry the main power circuit. MECHANICALANDELECTRICALCOORDINATION 230501 -1 Copyright 2025 MEEngineers ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  E. Manual Operation: Operation by hand without the use of any other power. F. MC: MechanicalContractor =Divisions 21 through23Contractor who furnishes motor. G. TC: Temperature Controls =Division 22, 23 or 25Contractor who furnishes control. H. EC: Electrical Contractor = Divisions 26, 27or 28 Contractor. I. FA: Fire Alarm Contractor =Division 25 or 28Contractor who furnishes Fire Alarm System. J. SC: Sprinkler Contractor K. EP: Electric to Pneumatic Converter. L. PE: Pneumatic to Electric Converter. RESPONSIBILITY SCHEDULE A. Responsibility: Unless otherwise indicated, all motors and controls for Divisions 21, 22, 23 and 25 equipment shallbe furnished, set in place and wiredin accordance with the following schedule: ITEM - Furnished By  Set In Place By  Power Wiring By  Control Wiring By  AHU Interior Marine Lights  MC  MC  EC  EC  Equipment Motors  MC  MC  EC  -. Automatically or Manually Controlled Starters/Contactors: (Note 4) -Separate -Factory Mounted and Wired  MC MC  EC MC  EC EC  TC TC  In Motor Control Centers (Note 4)  EC  EC  EC  TC  Motor Speed Controllers: (Note 4) -Separate -Factory Mounted and Wired  MC MC  EC MC  EC EC  TC TC  Disconnect Switches (Note 1)  EC  EC  EC  -. Thermal Overload Switches (Note 1)  EC  EC  EC  -. Switches (Manual or Automatic other than disconnect) (Note 2)  MC, EC or TC  MC or TC  EC or TC  TC or MC  Control Relays (Note 2)  MC, EC or TC  MC or TC  -. TC  Control Transformers  MC or TC  MC or TC  EC or TC  TC  Push Button Stations, Pilot Lights  MC  EC  EC  EC  Thermostat and Controls: Integral with Equipment or Directly Attached to Ducts, Pipes, etc. (Note 2)  MC, EC or TC  MC or TC  MC or TC  TC  MECHANICALANDELECTRICALCOORDINATION 230501 -2 Copyright 2025 MEEngineers ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  ITEM - Furnished By  Set In Place By  Power Wiring By  Control Wiring By  Equipment in Temperature Control Panels  TC  TC  TC  TC  Standalone Control Panels (BAS) (Note 6)  TC  TC  TC  TC  Valve Motors, Damper Motors, Solenoid Valves, etc.  TC  MC  TC  TC  EP Valves or Switches, P.E. Switches, etc.  TC  TC  -. TC  Fire Alarm System (Note 3)  FA  FA  EC  FA  Fire Sprinkler Alarm (Note 3)  SC  SC  EC  FA  Duct System Smoke Detectors (Note 5)  FA  MC  -. TC/FA  Relays for Fan Control via duct detectors (Note 5)  MC  MC  EC  TC/FA  Room Smoke Detectors Including Relays for Fan Control (Note 3)  FA  FA  -. FA  Smoke Management Controls (Note 7)  FA  FA  EC  FA  CO Sensors  TC  TC  TC  TC  Control Air Compressor  TC  TC  TC  TC  Refrigerated Air Dryer  TC  TC  TC  TC  Equipment Interlocks  TC  TC  -. TC  Fire/Smoke and Smoke Dampers (Note 7)  MC  MC  EC  FA/TC (Note 7)  Smoke Control Dampers (for smoke management system) (Note 7)  MC  MC  EC  FA/TC (Note 7)  Positive Indication Devices (i.e., current sensors, end switches, airflow sensors)  TC  TC  -. FA/TC (Note 7)  Electrical Metering  EC  EC  -. EC (Note 8)  Transfer Switches  EC  EC  EC  EC (Note 8)  Uninterruptible Power Supplies  EC  EC  EC  EC (Note 8)  Generator  EC  EC  EC  EC (Note 8)  GFI WP Roof Maintenance Receptacles  EC  EC  EC  (Note 9)  Notes: 1. Iffurnished as part offactory wired equipment furnished and set in place byMC, wiring and connections byEC. ElectricalContractor shallprovide disconnects for all electrical equipment unless otherwise indicated. 2. Iffloat switches, line thermostats, P.E. switches, time switches, or other controls carry the FULL LOAD CURRENT to any motor, they shallbe furnishedby MC, but they shall be set in place and connected by EC, except that where suchitems are an integralpart of the mechanical equipment, or directly attached to ducts, piping, or other mechanical equipment, they shallbe furnished and set in place byMC and connectedbyEC. If they do not carry the FULL LOAD CURRENT to any motor, they shall be furnished, set in MECHANICALANDELECTRICALCOORDINATION 230501 -3 Copyright 2025 MEEngineers ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  place and wiredbyTC contractor. Suchdevices shallbe provided at low voltage unless technically impossible 3. Pre-action system initiation signals (such as smoke detectors or general alarm conditions in a pre-action zone) shall be provided by the electrical contractor. 4. Electrical contractor is responsible for wiringfrom disconnect to starter andfrom starter to motor, unless factory wired. 5. Temperature control contractor shallprovide conduit and wire from auxiliary contact in motor starter to the detector so that the unit shuts down in all operating modes. Fire Alarm Contractor to wire from detector to fire alarm panel. 6. Eachdivision shallbe fully responsible for any controlpanels as calledfor on the drawings or specifications. a. ElectricalContractor shallprovide allpower and control wiring to fire/smoke or smoke dampers. HVAC, Controls, Electrical, andFire Alarm Contractors shall provide parallel control wiring (withfire alarm havingpriority signal) to dampers and equipment utilizedin both normal and smoke control modes, unless otherwise indicated. b. Fire alarm system shall override automatedbuilding control system during smoke exhaust mode. c. TC shallprovide additional required wiring and controls when damper also serves a temperature control or zoningfunction. 7. FA wires to components necessaryfor the operation and monitoring of the Smoke Management System. TC wires to components utilizedin the control and monitoring of the AutomatedBuildingControlSystem. This often requires dual wiring where components are controlledbyboth. In such case wiring and relays shallbe provided to ensure FA takes precedence in control over TC. 8. EC responsible to coordinate andbring control wiring to BMS controlpanel or other communication system for monitoring and control ofitem. BMS Vendor shall provide all programming as necessary. Coordinate exact requirements with Owner andEngineer. 9. EC shallProvide GFIWP rooflocated maintenance receptacles from normalpower source such that there are receptacles within 25 feet of all mechanical equipment. B. Power WiringbyDivisions 21, 22, 23 and25: The electricalpower for certain equipment provided under Divisions 21, 22, 23 and 25 may not be specifically indicated on the electrical drawings and must be provided by and field coordinated by the Divisions 21, 23 or 25 trade requiring such power. Sufficient power for this purpose shallbe furnished as “spare” dedicated circuit capacityin Division 26’s panelboards. All wiring, conduit and electricaldevices downstream of the panelboards is the responsibility of the Divisions 21, 23 and 25 trade requiring the power. 1. Such equipment is herebydefined as: a. Electricalheat trace. Requiredheat trace locations, capacities and specification are shown on the plumbing drawings. b. Fire protection air compressors, dry-pipe controlpanels and valves. Required connections are included in the Fire Protection work, and will be shown by that contractor’s engineered system design drawings. MECHANICALANDELECTRICALCOORDINATION 230501 -4 Copyright 2025 MEEngineers ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 1) Pre-action system initiation signals (such as smoke detectors or general alarm conditions in a pre-action zone) shall be provided under fire alarm work. 2) Sprinkler Contractor shallprovide pre-action controlpanel and interconnection between nearest suitable fire alarm panel and location of pre-action valve(s). 3) Fire Alarm Contractor shallprovide interconnection between fire command center alarm panel and/or remote communication fire alarm panel. c. Infraredplumbingfixtures. Fixtures requiringpower are shown on the plumbing drawings and schedules. Provide junction box and or receptacle as requiredby manufacturer. d. Temperature controlpanels, control air compressors andline voltage power for 24v control transformers. Required connections are includedin HVAC scope and willbe shown by that contractor’s control submittal drawings. e. Motorizeddampers andVAVboxes. Requiredlocations and specification are shown on the mechanicaldrawings andHVAC specifications. HVAC contractor shall provide damper, controls and power. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS A. Connections: 1. Connections to all controls directly attached to ducts, piping and mechanical equipment shall be made withflexible connections. B. Starters: 1. Provide magnetic starters for all three phase motors and equipment complete with: a. Control transformers. b. 120Vholding coils. c. Integral hand-off-auto switch. d. Auxiliary contacts requiredfor system operation plus one (1) spare. e. Refer to Motors, Starters andDrives, requirements for additionalinformation. C. Remote Switches and Pushbutton Stations: 1. Provide remote switches and/or pushbutton stations requiredfor manually operated equipment (if no automatic controls have been provided) complete with pilot lights of an approved type lighted by current from load side of starter. D. Special Requirements: 1. Motors, starters and other electrical equipment installedin moist areas or areas of special conditions, such as explosion proof, shall be designed and approved for installation in such areas with appropriate enclosure. MECHANICALANDELECTRICALCOORDINATION 230501 -5 Copyright 2025 MEEngineers ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  E. Identification: 1. Provide identification ofpurpose for each switch and/or pushbutton station furnished. Identification maybe either engraved plastic sign permanently mounted to wallbelow switch, or stamping on switch cover proper. All suchidentification signs and/or switch covers in finished areas shall match other hardware in the immediate area. F. Control Voltage: 1. Maximum allowable control voltage 120V. Fullyprotect control circuit conductors in accordance with National Electrical Code. G. DDC Control Interface: 1. Fully coordinate the requirements of eachdivision with regard to supplying acomplete DDC ControlSystem prior to submitting bid. 2. Allpower to controllers and controlled equipment shallbe furnished via dedicatedline voltage circuits. 3. Dedicated control circuits from electricalpanelboards to DDC controlpanels andfrom electrical panelboards to dedicated DDC J-boxes (for distributed control components such as VAV boxes), and control transformer line voltage connections shall be provided by HVAC Contractor where required. a. Exceptions: Where power wiringhas been shown on ElectricalDrawings. 4. Low voltage wiringfrom J-boxes to distributed control components, alllow voltage connections, all control panels and all control transformers (not part of unitary equipment) shallbe provided under Division 23 or 25. 5. Any additionalpower requirements shallbe the responsibility of the Division 23 or Contractor requiring same, and provided at no additional cost to the owner. CEILING AND CHASE CAVITY PRECEDENCE A. Coordinate ceiling cavity space carefully with all trades. In the event of conflict, install mechanical and electric systems within the cavity space allocation in the following order of precedence. Asystem withhigher precedence maydirect that systems oflower precedence be relocatedfrom space, which is required for expedient routing of the precedent system. 1. Plumbing waste, cooling coildrain piping, and roofdrain mains andleaders. 2. Condensate piping. 3. Hydronic main piping(12” andlarger). 4. Plumbing vent piping. 5. Supply, return and exhaust ductwork. 6. Electrical conduit greater than 3” diameter. 7. Hydronic branch and mains (greater than 2”, but less than 12”). 8. Domestic water mains piping. 9. Fire sprinkler mains andleaders. 10. Hydronic branchpiping(2” andless). 11. Domestic water branches. MECHANICALANDELECTRICALCOORDINATION 230501 -6 Copyright 2025 MEEngineers ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  12. Electrical conduit branch feeders. 13. Pneumatic controlpiping. 14. Fire sprinkler branchpiping and sprinkler runouts. B. Light fixtures have precedence in azone, extendingfrom the face of the ceiling to an elevation 2” above the height of the light fixtures. C. Examine the contract documents of all trades (e.g. allDivisions 21, 22, 23, 25, 26 and28 the architectural floor plans, reflected ceiling plans, elevations and sections, structuralplans and sections, etc.). D. Coordinate necessary equipment, ductwork andpipinglocations so that the finalinstallation is compatible with the materials and equipment of the other trades. E. Prepare shopdrawings for installation of all new workbefore installation to verify coordination of workbetween trades. F. Provide access doors for all equipment, valves, clean-outs, actuators and controls which require access for adjustment or servicing and which are located in otherwise unaccessible locations. 1. For equipment locatedin “accessible locations” such as lay-in ceilings: Locate equipment to provide adequate service clearance for normal maintenance without removing architectural, mechanical, electrical or structural elements such as the ceiling support system, electrical fixtures, etc. “Normal maintenance” includes, but is not limited to: filter changing;greasing ofbearings; usingp/t ports for pressure or temperature measurements; and replacement ofballasts, fuses, etc. 2. All system components requiring access shallbe grouped together to reduce the quantity of access doors required. G. See “Basic MechanicalMaterials andMethods” for additional access door requirements if section has been included in this specification. PART 2 – PRODUCTS MOTOR HORSEPOWER A. In general, all motors .HP and above shallbe three phase, all motors below .HP shallbe single phase. B. Voltage andphase of motors as scheduled on the electricaldrawings shall take precedence in the case of aconflict between the mechanical and electrical drawings or general condition 2.1. A., above. MECHANICALANDELECTRICALCOORDINATION 230501 -7 Copyright 2025 MEEngineers ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  C. Work under Divisions 21, 22 and23includes coordinating the electrical requirements of all mechanical equipment with the requirements of the work under Divisions 26, 27 and 28, before ordering the equipment. 1. If motor horsepowers are changed under the work ofDivisions 21, 22 or 23 without a change in duty of the motor’s driven device, coordination of additional electrical work (if any) and additionalpayment for that work(if any) shallbe provided under the section of Divisions 21, 22 or 23initiating the change. Increases or decreases in motor horsepower from that specified shall not be made without written approvalfrom the Architect/Engineer. PART 3 -EXECUTION -(Not Used) END OF SECTION 23 0501 MECHANICALANDELECTRICALCOORDINATION 230501 -8 Copyright 2025 MEEngineers ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  SECTION 23 05 02 -BASIC MECHANICAL REQUIREMENTS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. This Section supplements Division 1-GeneralRequirements. B. Where contradictions occur between this Section andDivision 1, the more stringent of the two shall apply. Architect/Engineer shalldecide whichis more stringent. C. Provisions of this section shall also apply to all sections ofDivisions 21, 22 and23. 1.2 DEFINITIONS A. The definitions ofDivision 1and the GeneralConditions of this specification also apply to Divisions 21, 22, 23 and 25Contract. B. “Contract Documents” constitute the drawings, specifications, general conditions, project manuals, etc., preparedbyEngineer (or other design professional in association with Engineer) for contractor’s bid or contractor’s negotiations with the Owner. Divisions 21, 22, 23 and25 drawings and specifications preparedby the Engineer are not construction documents. C. “Construction Documents”, “construction drawings”, and similar terms for Divisions 21, 22, 23 and 25Work refer to installation diagrams, shop drawings and coordination drawings prepared by the contractor using the design intent indicated on the Engineer’s contract documents. These specifications detail the contractor’s responsibility for “Engineering by Contractor” and for preparation of construction documents. D. "Furnish" means to "supply" and usually refers to an item of equipment. E. "Install" means to "set in place, connect andplace in full operational order". F. "Provide" means to "furnish and install". G. “Equal” or "Equivalent" means "meets the specifications of the reference product or item in all significant aspects." Significant aspects shallbe as determinedby the Architect/Engineer. H. "Workby other(s)divisions"; "re:_____ Division", and similar expressions means work to be performed under the contract documents, but not necessarily under the division or section of the work on which the note appears. It is the contractor’s sole responsibility to coordinate the work of the contract between his/her suppliers, subcontractors and employees. If clarification is required, consult Architect/Engineer before submittingbid. I. Byinference, any reference to a“contractor” or “sub-contractor” means the entity, whichhas contracted with the Owner for the work of the Contract Documents. ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 J. "Engineer" means the design professionalfirm, whichhas prepared these contract documents. All questions, submittals, etc. of this division shallbe routed to the Engineer (through proper contractual channels). K. “Piping” includes, in addition to pipe, allfittings, valves, hangers and other accessories related to such piping. L. “Concealed” means hidden from sight as in chases, furred spaces shafts, hung ceilings, or embeddedin construction. M. “Exposed” means, “not concealed” as defined above. Workin trenches, crawl spaces, and tunnels shall be considered “concealed” unless otherwise specifically noted. N. “Governmental” means all municipal, state andfederalgovernmental agencies. O. Where anydevice or part of equipment is herein referred to in the singular number (such as “the pump”), such reference shall be deemed to apply to as many suchdevices as are required to complete the installation as shown on the Drawings. P. “HVAC” means Heating, Ventilating andAir Conditioning. Q. “PlumbingContractor” means the Contractor doingPlumbing work. R. “Fire Protection Contractor” means the Contractor doingFire Protection work. COORDINATION A. Contract Documents: 1. General: The Contract Documents are diagrammatic showing certain physical relationships, which must be established within the Division’s work andits interface with other work. Such establishment is the exclusive responsibility of the Contractor. Drawings shall not be scaled for the purpose of establishing material quantities. This division shall coordinate its work with all divisions of the work and adjust its work as required by the actual conditions of the project. 2. Unless otherwise noted, the workdescribed on the plans and specifications shallinclude the furnishing andinstallation of alllabor and materials necessaryfor complete and operation HVAC, fire protection andplumbing system. Contractor shallfurnish these even ifitems required to achieve this (i.e. offsets, isolation, balancing devices, maintenance clearance, etc.) are not specifically shown. 3. Data given on the drawings is as exact as couldbe secured. Absolute accuracyis not guaranteed and the contractor shall obtain and verify exact locations, measurements, levels, space requirements, potential conflicts with other trades, etc. at the site and shall satisfactorily adapt their work to the actual condition. 4. Visit the site before submitting abid to become thoroughlyfamiliar with the actual conditions of the project. No extras willbe permitteddue to lack ofknowledge of the existing conditions. 5. SupplementalInstructions: The exact location for some items in this Specification may not be shown on the Drawings. The location of suchitems maybe establishedby the Architect/Engineer during the progress of the work. Make reasonable modifications in the layout as needed to prevent conflict with work of other trades. 6. Discrepancies: a. Examine Drawings andSpecifications of allDivisions of the work. b. Report anydiscrepancies to the Architect/Engineer and obtain written instructions before proceeding. c. Should there be aconflict within or between the Specifications or Drawings, the most stringent or higher quality requirements shall apply. d. Items calledfor in either specifications or drawings shallbe required as if called for in both. 7. Constructability: a. Examine Drawings andSpecifications of allDivisions of the work. b. Report anyissues to the Architect/Engineer which mayprevent installation of Divisions 21, 22, 23 and 25 work in accordance with the Contract Documents and the original construction contract. c. Report allissues within 30 days after contract. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  B. Be responsible for providingproper documentation of equipment product data and shop drawings to all entities providing service. This coordination shallinclude, but not be limited to, the following: 1. Fire Protection Contractor shallprovide shopdrawings to HVAC andPlumbing Contractors. 2. Automatic Temperature Controls, BuildingManagement andTest-Adjust-Balance Contractors shall be provided with equipment product data and shop drawings as appropriate from all other contractors, and shallfurnish the same information about controldevices (such as valves, test wells, etc.) to the appropriate Contractors. C. Coordination Drawings: 1. Submit coordination drawings for all HVAC, Plumbing, Fire Protection and Electrical work. The drawings shallbe fully coordinated and signed offby all affected trades prior to submission. The coordination drawings shallinclude the following at aminimum: a. All major ductwork, piping, conduit and equipment. b. Reflected ceilingplans withlight fixtures. c. Current architecturalfloor plans. d. Major structural elements. e. Elevations of piping ductwork or equipment. f. Sections through critical spaces. 2. The drawings shallbe at asuitable scale (3/8”=1’-0” minimum) to clearly show information. 3. Any workinstalled without approved coordination drawings is done at the Contractor’s risk. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  D. CAD Drawings: 1. Electronic Auto Caddrawings are available from M-EEngineers. The service charge for the delivery of these files is $200per floor plan per trade. Contractor willbe required to execute afile transfer agreement. E. Existing Conditions: 1. Inspect existing conditions prior to bidding. 2. Provide proper coordination of mechanical work with existing conditions. F. Utility Connections: 1. Coordinate the connection of mechanical and electrical systems with the Civildrawings and utility companies. 2. Comply with regulations of utility suppliers. 3. The Contract Documents indicate the available information on existing utilities and services, and on new services (if any) to be provided to the project by utility companies and agencies. a. NotifyArchitect/Engineer immediatelyifdiscrepancies are found. 4. Coordinate mechanical utilityinterruptions one weekin advance with the Owner and the UtilityCompany. Plan work so that the duration of the interruption is kept to a minimum. This shallinclude premium time, shift labor and multiple crews to accelerate the work andlessen the impact on facility operations. G. If the project is constructed under multiple bidpackages eachContractor shall coordinate their work with the progress of the other contractors performing similar or unrelated work. H. Coordinate ceiling cavity space carefully with all trades. I. Coordinate withElectricalWork. J. Cutting and patching as specified. K. Chases, Inserts and Openings: 1. Provide measurements, drawings, andlayouts so that openings, inserts and chases in new construction can be built in as construction progresses. 2. Check sizes andlocations of openings provided. Any cutting andpatching made necessary byfailure to provide measurements, drawings, andlayouts at the proper time shall be done at no additional cost to the Owner. 3. Coordinate roof openings for all roof-mounted equipment. Openings on documents are diagrammatic anddo not represent manufacturer specific requirements. Actual opening size, orientation andlocation, as well as structural coordination, is the responsibility of the mechanical contractor. Provide transitions on ductwork to accommodate actual roof openings. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  L. Support Dimensions: Provide dimensions anddrawings so that concrete bases and other equipment supports to be provided under other Sections of the Specifications can be built at the proper time. M. The work throughout shallbe executed as quickly as conditions permit in the best and the most thorough manner under the direction of and to the satisfaction of the Engineers, Owners and Architects, who willjointlyinterpret the meaning of the Drawings and Specifications, and shall have the power to reject any work and materials which, in the judgment, are not in full accordance therewith. N. The work calledfor under this contract shallbe carried on simultaneously with the work of other trades in amanner such as not to delay the overallprogress of the work. Furnishpromptly to other trades involved at the project, all information and measurements relating to the work which they may require. Cooperate with them in order to secure the harmony necessaryin the interest of the project as awhole. O. Keep acompetent superintendent in charge of the work at all times. Such superintendent shall be replacedif unsatisfactory to the Owner. P. Upon award of contract, consult with the Architect and negotiate with subcontractors and manufactures, and within thirty (30) days submit five (5) copies of a preliminarylist of major equipment, for approval, complete with name of manufacturer, dates of purchase orders, and deliverydates to the site. Also submit within thirty(30)days, five (5) copies of apreliminary schedule ofinstallation of the various systems. The list shallbe revised monthly andfive (5) copies shallbe submitted. The second submittal shall contain the names of manufacturers of scheduled equipment (with names, addresses, and telephone numbers of local representatives). Q. Maintain acomplete file of shopdrawings at all times available to the Owner’s representatives. R. Everyfacility shallbe provided to permit inspection of the workby the Owner’s representatives during the course of construction. S. Where items of equipment and/or materials are indicatedin the Specifications as being furnished by other trades for installation, assume responsibilityfor the unloading of such equipment and/or materials from the delivery trucks, and for providing safe storage for same as required pendinginstallation. T. Where the workis to be installedin close proximity to work of other trades, or where there is evidence that the work is to interfere with work of other trades, assist in working out space conditions to make a satisfactory adjustment. U. Prepare composite workingdrawings and sections at asuitable scale not less than 3/8” =1’-0” clearly showinghow the workis to be installedin relation to the work of other trades. If the installation is made before coordinating with other trades, make all necessary changes in the work without extra charge to the Owner. Coordinate allpenetrations of the floor slabprior to commencing work. If the installation is made before coordinating with other trades, make all necessary changes in the work without extra charge to the Owner. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  V. Determine where clearances are limited and where installation drawings or schematics, “Construction drawings”, or coordination drawings may be requiredin accordance with or in excess of, those required by the specifications. W. Coordinate allpenetrations of the floor slabprior to commencing work. Coordinate all penetrations with other divisions of work. All contractors are individually responsible for all penetrations required by their division. X. All roof curbs, roofjacks, roof thimbles, sanitary vents, roofdrains, piping roofpenetration, ductwork roof penetrations, etc. shall be compatible with the roofing system and the roofing vendor. Coordinate allflashingdetails with the roofing vendor and architect. Y. Coordinate routing of all mechanical, plumbing, andfire protection systems with all new structural beams, columns, etc. to allow for rerouting as required. ENGINEERING BY CONTRACTOR A. The construction of this work requires the Contractor to perform certain design activities with regard to several of the Contract Mechanical systems or subsystems that can onlybe fully ascertained with regard to the prevailing site field conditions during construction activities. All such designs and related activities shall be the complete responsibility of the Contractor. Where these design activities require engineering, it is the responsibility of the Contractor to engage the service of a Professional Engineer licensedin the project jurisdiction and experiencedin the areas related to the design activities performed by the Contractor. B. Systems or subsystems which require engineering responsibilityby the contractor include, but are not limited to: 1. Any system not fullydetailed on the drawings. 2. *Fire protection systems andhydraulic calculations. 3. Hangers, supports, sleeves, anchors, and miscellaneous steel as required. Where shown in drawings and details, these have been providedfor coordination only. 4. *Vibration isolators. 5. *Seismic restraints. 6. Temperature controls. 7. *Field erected refrigeration systems connecting more than two devices. 8. *Variable refrigeration flow (VRF) systems exceeding6.6lbs (3kg) of refrigerant. 9. *Piping expansion and contraction provisions; thermal and/or seismic. * -Denotes items requiring signed and sealeddrawings and/or calculations by alicensed Professional Engineer C. Contractor’s design responsibility shallinclude system design, any required calculations to support system design, any compliance documents or certifications by anygoverning body up to and including replacement of design engineer with adifferent engineer of record, retained and paidby the contractor, as determinedby authorities or originaldesign engineer. Where supplemental steelis required to support piping or equipment, the supplemental steel shall be designed to provide amaximum deflection of L/360 at the midspan under the supported load. The piping or equipment shallbe isolated from the building structure by means ofisolators as required by the mounting type specified for the piping and/or equipment. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  D. Contactor shall complete all controlled or specialinspections andfile all requiredpaperworkin atimely manner. Professional engineer retainedby contractor to serve as “specialinspector” shall meet all requirements for special inspector as determinedby the authority having jurisdiction. E. Where the contract documents indicate “Verifyin Field” or “Contractor to Verify” or other similar terms, the contractor shallbe responsible for verifying the extent of the work by performingfieldinvestigations prior to submitting their bid. All costs associated with performing the complete scope of work, as determinedby the contractor’s field verification, shall be included in the contractor’s bid price. F. All capacities shallbe coordinated with the jobsite altitude. REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS A. Codes: Comply with the latest editions of the following: 1. BuildingCode of the City ofNew York. 2. New York City Energy Conservation Code 3. National Electric Code. 4. LocalModifications to above Codes. B. Applicable NFPA Standards. C. Requirements of Local Utility Companies: 1. Comply with rules and regulations oflocal utility companies. Include in bid the cost of all valves, valve boxes, meter boxes, meters and such accessory equipment which willbe required for the project. D. Other Regulations: Comply with the latest editions ofthe following: 1. U.S. andState Department ofLabor SafetyRegulations pertaining to the completed project. 2. Requirements of FDNY. 3. Regulations of the HealthDepartment havingjurisdiction. IncludingNew YorkCity D.O.H. 4. Regulations of the Fire Marshal. 5. ASHRAE Energy Conservation Standard 90A. 6. ASHRAE Ventilation Standard 62. 7. ASHRAE 90.1. 8. ASHRAE 13 9. ASHRAE 135 ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  10. Americans withDisabilities Act (ADA). 11. Clean Air Act. 12. Clean Water Act. 13. NFPANationalFire Protection Association 14. ANSIAmerican NationalStandards Institute 15. ASTMAmerican Societyfor TestingMaterials 16. AWWAAmerican Water Works Association 17. NEMANationalElectric Manufacturers Association 18. SMACNASheet Metal andAir ConditioningNationalAssociation, Inc. 19. ARIAir Conditioning andRefrigeration Institute 20. UL Underwriters’ Laboratories 21. AMCA Air Moving and Conditioning Association 22. ADC Air Diffusion Council 23. AABC Associated Air Balance Council 24. LocalWater CompanyRules andRegulations 25. Life safety/Code Report E. AdditionalRegulations: Follow additional regulations, which appear in individualSections of these Specifications. F. Allpiping shallbe domestically manufactured and shallbe by the same manufacturer. G. Contradictions: Where codes are contradictory, follow the most stringent, unless otherwise indicatedin Plans or Specifications. Architect/Engineer shalldetermine whichis most stringent. H. Contract Documents Not in Compliance: 1. Where the Drawings andSpecifications do not comply with the minimum requirements of the Codes, either notify the Architect/Engineer, in writingduring the Bidding Period, of the revisions required to meet Code requirements, or provide an installation which complies with the Code requirements. After enteringinto contract, Contractor willbe held to complete all work necessary to meet these requirements without additional expense to the Owner. 2. Follow Drawings andSpecifications where they are superior to Code requirements. I. Contractor as Technical Expert 1. When the contractor declares himself to be an expert with regard to how asystem must be constructed or what willbe required to gain code official approval, it shall be assumed that the contractor was an expert at the time of bid andhas included all costs associated with proclaimed “required” work in his base bid. J. The Contractors bid shallbe based on the execution of all work required to allow the contractor to self-certify the work of the project. Self-certification shallbe performedif requestedby the Owner. Submitting abidfor the contract work shallbe considered confirmation by the contractor that he is in good standing with the department of buildings with respect to self-certification. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  K. Work of contract shallbe bid as describedin contract document including alldetails, notes, plans, routing, etc. Contractor’s intentional or unintentional exclusion of scope or assumptions about alternate construction methods, configurations, materials or testing shallbe at the contractors risk and the engineer reserves the right to require that the workbe constructed per plans. Statements such as “Idid not bidit that way”, or “Idon’t have that in myprice”, shallbe understood to be an admission of the contractors error but willhave no effect in reducing the contract requirements or increasing the cost to the Owner. L. Permits 1. Obtain allpermits requiredby authorities and agencies havingjurisdiction for the work of this Division. 2. Post permits as required. 3. Obtain all approvals, including controlledinspections, prior to request for finalpayment. M. Tap and Connection Fees: 1. Payfees chargedbyUtilities for making connections, bringing service to propertyline, or to meter and similar services. 2. Investment fees or plant development fees, which are charges leviedbyUtilities to cover the cost of the utility system to be borne by this project, are not part of the work of this Division. N. Inspections andTests: 1. Arrange for all requiredinspections and tests. 2. Pay all charges. 3. NotifyArchitect/Engineer 48hours before tests. 4. Submit one copyfor Owners records ofpermits, licenses, inspection reports and test reports. RECORD DRAWINGS A. General Recording Procedure: 1. Maintain ablue-line set ofSprinkler, Plumbing andHVACContract Drawings in clean, undamaged condition, for mark-up ofinstallations, which vary, from the Contract Drawings. 2. Record changes drawn to scale andfullydimensioned. a. Work concealedbehind or within other work, in an inaccessible arrangement. b. Mains and branches of piping systems: 1) with valves and controldevices located and numbered. 2) with concealed unions located. ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 3) withitems requiring maintenance located(traps, strainers, expansion compensators, tanks, etc.). c. Undergroundpiping andducts, both exterior andinterior. d. Ductworklayouts, includinglocations of coils, dampers, filters, boxes and similar units. e. Concealed control system devices and sensors. B. Corrected Drawings: 1. Obtain aset of contract drawings on CAD. 2. Update the CADfiles to reflect as-built conditions. 3. Transmit correctedCADfiles andplots as asubmittal to the Architect/Engineer for Owner’s use and record. C. Temperature Control Drawings: 1. Provide as-built Drawings of work under this contract including: a. Ladder wiringdiagram. b. Pneumatic schematic diagrams. c. One line system diagram. d. Control schematic of equipment with controldevices located andidentified. e. Wiring or tubing termination diagrams. f. List of materials. g. Floor plan indicating alldevice locations. h. Control sequences. i. Indicate electricalpower source for eachpoint of connection to the electrical system. 2. Reproducible temperature controldrawings and computer files shallbe delivered to the Architect/Engineer prior to Owner’s acceptance of project. OPERATING AND MAINTENANCE DATA A. Submission: 1. Submit typed andbound copies ofOperating andMaintenance Manuals prior to scheduling systems demonstration for the Owner. 2. Bind eachMaintenance Manualin one or more vinyl covered, 3-ringbinders, with pockets for foldeddrawings. Mark the back spine of eachbinder with system identification and volume number. B. Required Contents: 1. Manuals shallhave index with tabdividers for each major equipment section to facilitate locating information on specific piece of equipment. 2. Identifydata within each section withdrawing code numbers as they appear on Drawings andSpecifications. Include as aminimum the followingdata: ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  a. Alphabeticallist of system components, with the name, address and24hour telephone number of the company responsible for servicing eachitem during the first year of operation. Include point of contact for company. b. Operatinginstructions for complete system including: 1) Emergencyprocedures for fire andfailure of major equipment. 2) Major start, operation and shut-down procedures. c. Maintenance Instructions for eachpiece of equipment including: 1) Equipment lists. 2) Proper lubricants andlubricatinginstructions for eachpiece of equipment. 3) Necessary cleaning, replacement and/or adjustment schedule. 4) Product Data. 5) Installation instructions. 6) Parts lists. 7) Complete wiringdiagrams. d. Temperature controldiagrams andO&Minformation as specified above (as-built). e. Marked or changedprints locating concealedparts and variations from the original system design (as-built drawings). f. Balancing Report. g. Valve schedule and associatedpiping schematics. See “Identification” specification sections. h. Copies of any extended equipment warranties, which are greater than one year. WARRANTIES A. The warrantyperiodis one year after Date ofAcceptance. 1. During this period, provide labor and materials as required to repair or replace defects in the mechanical system at no additional cost to the Owner. Provide certificate withO&M manual submittal which guarantees same-day service response to Owners callfor all such warranty service. 2. Provide certificates for suchitems of equipment whichhave warranties in excess of one year. Insert copies in O&M manuals. Such equipment shallinclude, but not be limited to: a. Temperature Control Valves five (5) years. b. DX equipment compressors: five (5)years 3. Provide extended manufacturers warranties to cover one fullyear from date of acceptance if standard warranty starts any time prior to that date. 4. Provide factory trained service personnelfor all warranty work on the following equipment: a. BuildingManagement System b. Packaged Equipment c. Refrigeration Systems B. Refer to Division 1for additional requirements. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  1.9 INDEMNIFICATION A. Pay all royalties anddefend all suits or claims for infringement of anypatent rights and save the Owner harm from loss on account thereof. B. Ifprocess or article specifiedis an infringement ofpatent, promptly notify the Architect in writing, and any necessary changes shall be as provided in the Contract for changes in the work. If the Contractor performs any work specified knowing it to be an infringement of patent, he shall bear all costs arising therefrom. C. Take out all necessaryinsurance, free of extra charge, and agree to indemnify and save harmless the party contractingfor services against loss or expense, by reason of the liabilityimposedby law upon such partyfor damages because ofbodilyinjuries, includingdeath at any time resulting therefrom, accidentally sustained by any person or persons or on account of damage to property arising out of or consequence of the performance of this Contract, whether such injuries to persons or damaged property are due or claimed to be due by any negligence in the performance of the Contract, the party contractingfor services, employees or agents, or any other person. 1.10 SCOPE A. These documents serve to define the nature of the system, level of control, finish, relationships with other building system, andgeneraldesign intent of this division of work. The contractor shall examine the documents of all trades to completely familiarize him/herself with the various concepts presented by each trade and adapt this work and any associatedpricing accordingly. B. The Contractor shall: 1. Supply alllabor, transportation, materials, apparatus, light, and tools necessaryfor the completion of the mechanical, plumbing, fire protection work. 2. Install, maintain, and remove all construction equipment. 3. Be responsible for safe, lawful, andproper construction execution. 4. Construct, in the best and most workmanlike manner, acomplete project and everything properlyincidental thereto, as shown on the Drawings, as stated in the Specifications, or reasonablyimplied there from, allin accordance with the Contract documents. C. Work Included The Work includes the providing of all labor, materials, equipment, accessories, services and tests necessary to complete and make ready for operation by the Owner, all Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning Work, as shown on the Drawings and hereinafter specified, including, but not limited to the following. 1. Rooftoppackagedheat pumps and associatedductwork. 2. All motor starters and controllers for equipment furnishedby this Contractor. Packaged type units shall be furnished completely pre-wired with panels mounted on the units as specified. All other motor starters and controllers willbe turned over to the Electrical Contractor for installation and wiring. 3. Heat recovery reclaim coils, pumps and controls. 4. Filters. 5. Fans. 6. Cabinet and unit heaters, finned tube radiation and convectors. 7. VRF systems. 8. Condensate pumps andpiping to floor drain or janitor sink. 9. Accessories such as V-belt drives, flow measuringdevices, draft gauges, machinery guards, thermostats, pressure gauges. 10. Inertia blocks and vibration isolation equipment. 11. Piping, fittings, and valves. 12. Sheet metalductwork and accessories, includingdampers, access doors, etc. 13. Registers, grilles and diffusers. 14. Fire dampers, smoke dampers andfire/smoke dampers. 15. Installation of smoke detectors in ductwork. 16. Acousticalduct lining, where specified or shown on drawings. 17. Pipe, duct and equipment insulation. 18. Constant and variable volume air terminals. 19. Temperature Control: Acomplete system of temperature control shallbe installedin connection with the HVAC systems, including all thermostats, air piping, damper motors, etc. All control wiringfor automatic temperature controls, includinginterlocking wiring for fans, chillers, pumps, etc. by this Contractor, unless otherwise shown on the electrical Drawings. 20. Excavation andbackfill as specified under “SpecialRequirements for Mechanical and Electrical Work”. 21. Painting andpipe identification for all workby this Contractor is previously specified under “Special Requirements for Mechanical and ElectricalWork”. 22. Dieselfuel oilpiping, underground tank, manhole covers, tankhold-down straps, exhaust piping, cathodic protection, outdoor air intakes, as herein after specified as shown on the Drawings. 23. Test andbalancing. 24. Sleeves, pipe inserts and anchor bolts, escutcheons, prefabricated roof curbs, etc., as hereinafter specified. 25. Identification, name plates, tags and charts. 26. Cutting and rough patching. 27. Furnishing and setting of electric motors. 28. Furnishing of starters, motor control centers and motor controldevices as specified under “SpecialRequirements for Mechanical and ElectricalWork”. 29. Templates and anchor bolts for equipment bases. 30. Fuel oil system complete withpackagedfuel oilpumps, piping, controls, oil storage tanks, manhole covers andhold-down straps. Concrete foundation and manhole enclosures under General Construction. 31. Capflashingfor pipe andduct passing through roof. 32. Furnishing of access doors. 33. Energy management (building automation) system. 34. Concrete pads for allHVAC work. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  D. Certificates ofCompliance 1. Contractor shallfile for and obtain allCertificates ofCompliance. Certificates of Compliance are required for the following systems: a. Air conditioning, ventilation, and exhaust systems 2. All equipment requiring aCertificate ofCompliance shallbe inspected and certifiedby a third-party special inspector in accordance with BC 1705.21 (Mechanical Systems). 3. After inspection, the third-party specialinspector shall submit to the Certificate of Occupancy Unit acompleted Certificate of Compliance card, and the applicable certified TR1 Form. If the equipment is properly certified, the Department willissue an approved (stamped)Certificate of Compliance card. 4. The contractor shall securelypost the approvedCertificate ofCompliance card on or adjacent to the service equipment. No equipment shallbe operated prior to issuance of the Certificate of Compliance. 5. The contractor shallprovide support for all specialinspections and any model and serial numbers of units purchased and approved for installation, as required to file for the Certificates of Compliance. 1.11 SPECIAL INSPECTIONS A. Contactors shallprovide all required specialinspections for all workperformed. Contractor shall retain a third party Architect or Engineer, independent of the primary design team and contractor, to complete all requiredinspections and execute all requiredTR-1 documents and any additional documents that may supplement or replace these documents in the future. B. Contractors’ specialinspection engineer shallbe in good standing with the Department of Buildings and shall meet all requirements and qualifications established by the Department of Buildings. This shallinclude education, formal training, in-service training, corporate structure, certifications, professionaldevelopment, etc. If, at any time, the Architect or Engineer shallfail to meet the qualification requirements of the Department of Buildings the contractor shall replace the Architect or Engineer with another qualified professional. C. If at any time the Architect or Engineer shallfail to produce requiredinspections and associated documentation in atimely manner, the contractor shall replace the Architect or Engineer with another qualifiedprofessional. D. Allinspections shallbe completedin strict accordance with the requirements establishedby the Department ofBuildings. Records ofinspections shallbe maintainedin accordance withgood practice, but in no case less than 6years from time offiling. Documentation shallbe in accordance with requirements established by NYCDOB. E. The work of the project willbe phased and completed on an accelerated schedule. This will create a need for multiple inspections and inspection documentation filings. Architect and Engineers performinginspections shallfully understand the phasing of the work and be prepared to complete inspections and provide filingdocuments in accordance with the established schedule. The inspector shall expect that multiple inspection visits maybe required to support asingle inspection filing. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  F. Specialinspector shallhave no financialinterest in the construction, installation, maintenance of structures or components that theyinspect. G. Specialinspector shall cooperate with any audits or inquiries initiatedbyNYCDOB or other authorities having jurisdiction. H. Specialinspectors shalllimit the scope of their inspections to systems andinstallations that their education, experience, certifications, etc., qualify them to inspect. I. Specialinspectors shall report anydiscrepancies or deficiencies to the contractor immediately upon detection and shallfollow-up with contractor to confirm that conditions have been corrected or repaired. J. Specialinspection agencies shall carryinsurance in the coverage limits establishedby NYCDOB. At aminimum, this shallbe a$500,000professionalliabilitypolicy, $1,000,000 generalliability and other statutory insurance at statutory limits. K. Specialinspection agencies shallhave afull time director in responsible charge that does not serve as an inspector or director for any other testing agencies. L. Controlled/specialinspections shallbe provided as follows: 1. Fire Dampers, Fire Smoke Dampers, Smoke Dampers 2. Fire-Resistant Penetrations andJoints 3. Emergency Lighting 4. EmergencyPower System (Generators) 5. Fuel Oil Storage and Piping 6. Ventilation System 7. Sprinkler Systems 8. Standpipe Systems 9. MechanicalSystems 10. MechanicalDemolition 11. Post-installedAnchors (BB#2014-018, 2014-019) 12. Seismic Plumbing, Mechanical, FuelGas, &Electrical Components 13. Seismic Isolation 14. EnergyCode Compliance Inspections (TR8) 1.12 MANDATORY GOVERNING PROVISION BC 1705.21 BC 1705.17 BC 1705.36, BC 2702 BC 1705.36, BC 2702 BC 1705.22 BC 1705.21 BC 1705.29 BC 1705.30 BC 1705.21 BC 1705.25.5.1 BC 3306.6 BC 1705.37 BC 1705.12.3 BC 1705.12.5 BC 110.3.5 A. Omissions of words or phrases, such as “the Contractor shall,” “in conformity with,” “shallbe,” “as noted on the Drawings”, “according to the Drawings”, “an”, “the”, and “all”, may or may not be intentional. B. Omitted words or phrases shallbe suppliedbyinference. ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 1.13 PROTECTIONOFPROPERTYANDMATERIALS A. Provide protection against dust migration, rain, wind, storms, frost, or heat, so as to maintain all work, materials, apparatus, and fixtures free from injury or damage. B. At end of eachday’s work, cover all new worklikely to be damaged. C. Do not interrupt the integrity of the building securityduringperiods when the project is staffed or duringperiods where the project isn’t staffed. 1.14 OWNER FURNISHED EQUIPMENT A. All equipment called out in the Specifications or shown on the Drawings as “Owner-Furnished Equipment” shallbe installed and connected under this Contract. Provide rough-ins, andfinal connections for all equipment. B. Kitchen and sterilization equipment willbe furnished and set in place under other Sections of the Specifications. C. Furnish andinstall all shutoff valves and traps andpipingfor eachitem of equipment. Any additionalpipe andfittings required for kitchen and sterilization equipment, made necessary by roughing outlets not beinglocated where shown on the manufacture’s approved Drawings, shall be furnished andinstalled by the Contractor. D. All such work that is not concealedin the construction or in base cabinets or compartments, shall be polished nickel and chromium plated redbrass pipe, with cast brass fittings, cast brass escutcheons, valves, and traps all finished with polished chromium plating over nickelplating. E. All workin connection with such equipment shallbe done under the supervision of the manufacturer and the Contractor shall be responsible for anydamage to any of the equipment that may result from his work in connection therewith. 1.15 TEMPORARY FACILITIES A. Light, Heat, Power, etc. 1. Temporarypower andlighting shallbe providedby the electrical contractor. 2. Temporaryheat shallbe providedby the HVACContractor. 3. The contractor shallbe responsible for maintaining acceptable indoor air qualityin adjacent occupied spaces. B. Use ofPermanent BuildingEquipment for TemporaryHeating or Cooling. 1. Permanent building equipment shall not be used without written permission from the Owner. If this equipment is usedfor temporaryheating or cooling, it shallbe adequately maintained per manufacturer’s instructions and protected with filters, strainers, controls, reliefs, etc. The contractor shallprotect all equipment and systems as directedby the engineer. The warrantyperiod shall not start until the equipment is turned over to the ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 Owner for his use. The contractor shallprovide extended warranties for parts andlabor for all such equipment. Equipment shall not be turned over to the Owner until the temperature controls have been tested and accepted by the Owner and Engineer. Equipment shall be prepared and turned over to owner in as-new condition. 1.16 ROUGH-IN FOR FUTURE CONNECTION A. Provide rough-in services for all systems which shall extend to future equipment or spaces as shown on the drawings. 1. Provide sufficiently sizedbranchplumbinglines withisolation valves to serve future equipment. 2. Provide sufficiently sizedBMS/ATC master controlpanel(s) to accommodate a20% increase in the number of equipment unit controllers and/or connected controlpoints. 1.17 INSTALLATION GENERAL REQUIREMENTS A. Furnish, apply, install, connect, erect, clean, and condition manufactured materials and equipment as recommended in manufacturer’s printeddirections (maintained on job site during installation) or where local codes or regulations take precedence. B. Provide all attachment devices and materials necessary to secure materials together or to other materials. Erect, install, and secure components in astructurally sound and appropriate manner. C. Suspend each trade’s work separatelyfrom structure. D. Make allowance for ample and normal expansion and contraction for allbuilding components and piping systems that are subject to such. E. Install materials only when conditions of temperature, moisture, humidity, and conditions of adjacent building components are conducive to achieving the best installation results. F. Where necessary, temporarilybrace, shore, or otherwise support members untilfinal connections are installed. Leave all temporarybracing, shoring, or other structural supports in place as long as practical for safety and to maintain proper alignment. G. Store andhandle materials in amanner to prevent scratching, abrading, distortion, chipping, breaking, rusting, or other disfigurement. Materials damagedfor these reasons shallbe replaced at no additional cost to Owner. H. Conduct workin amanner to avoidinjury or damage to previouslyplaced work. Any work so impaired or damaged shallbe replaced at no expense to Owner. I. Fabricate andinstall materials true to line, plumb, andlevel. ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 J. Leave finished surfaces smooth andflat, free from wrinkles, warps, scratches, dents, and other imperfections. K. Furnish materials in longest practicallengths andlargest practical sizes to avoid all unnecessary jointing. L. Make alljoints secure, tightlyfitted, and as inconspicuous as possible by the best accepted practice in joinery and fabrication. M. Consult Engineer for mountingheight or position of any unit not specificallyindicated or located on Drawings or specifiedin Specifications. N. Job mixed multi-component materials usedin the work shallbe mixedin such regulated and properly sizedbatches that material can be usedbefore it begins to “set”. Mixing of apartially “set” batch with another batch offresh materials will not be accepted and entire batch shall be discarded and removedfrom site. Clean all mixing tools and appliances that can be contaminated prior to mixing offresh materials. O. In addition to the above refer to eachSection of the Specifications for additionalinstallation requirements for the proper completion of all work. P. Piping or ductwork connected to equipment may require different size connection than indicated on the Drawings. The Contractor shallprovide transition pieces as required at the equipment, at no additional cost. 1.18 SCAFFOLDING, RIGGING AND HOISTING A. Provide all scaffolding, rigging, hoisting and services necessaryfor erection anddeliveryinto the premises of all equipment and materials furnished under this Section of the Specifications, and remove same from premises when no longer required. B. In the event that supplementarybracing of the basic building structure is required to assure a secure rigging procedure and a secure route for the equipment beinghandled, assume full responsibility for such supplementarybracing. C. Eachdivision is responsible for providing alllabor and materials necessary to split equipment into multiple pieces to facilitate rigging to the finalinstalled location. Each division is responsible for the reassembly of the equipment and test to confirm proper operation and maintain all the manufacturers warrantees. 1.19 TOOLS A. All specified tools for proper operation and maintenance of the equipment shallbe delivered to the Owner’s representative and areceipt requested for the same at no additional cost to the Owner. ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 1.20 QUIET OPERATION A. All equipment and material shall operate under all conditions ofload without any sound or vibration which, in the opinion of the Architect, is objectionable. Where sound or vibration conditions arise which are considered objectionable by the Architect, eliminate same in a manner approved by the Architect. 1.21 RUBBISH REMOVAL A. See to it that the Project is, at all times, maintainedfree of all rubbish, rubble, waste material, packaging materials, etc. accumulating as aresult of this work. Assume responsibilityfor the cleaning up of packaging removedfrom materials and equipment furnished by other trades for the installation. Note that final acceptance of the workis contingent upon the project beingfree of all excess and waste materials resulting from the work. 1.22 DELIVERY OF MATERIAL A. Deliver the material and store same in spaces indicatedby the Architect and assume full responsibility for damage to structure caused by any overloading of the material or storage in spaces exposed to moisture, humidity, or other environmental conditions. B. Hoods which willbe duct-connectedin the field shallbe received and set in place byHVAC Contractor. 1.23 ALTERATIONS A. All equipment, piping, ductwork, etc. to be removed shallbe disposed of, turned over to the owner or salvaged as directedby the Owner. They shall not be removedfrom the premises without the Owner's approval. B. When new work and alterations render equipment, piping andductwork useless, such equipment, piping and ductwork shall be removed and connections thereof to lines or ducts remaining shallbe properly capped or plugged andleft in construction. If construction, such as hung ceiling, furredbeams, chase, etc., is opened up and removed during the course of the construction, the useless pipe and ducts therein shallbe completely removed C. No dead ends shallbe left on anypiping or ductwork upon completion ofjob. D. Provide temporary supports where required. E. Where alterations revealpiping, ductwork, conduit circuits, wiring, and accessories that must necessarily remain in service, same shall be rerouted, replaced or altered as required to make same completely concealedin the new work at no additional cost to the Owner. F. This Contractor shall not interrupt any of the services of the existingfacility, nor interfere with the services in any way without the express permission of the Owner. Suchinterruptions and interferences shall be made as brief as possible and only at the time stated by the Owner. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  G. Under no circumstances shall this Contractor or his workmen be permitted to use anypart of the facility as ashop, except parts designatedby the owner for such purposes. H. Provide branch shut-off valves as required to install new work without continuous shut-down of entire building chilled water, condenser water, hot water, and steam systems 1.24 PAINTING A. Paint all unpainted, non-insulated, non-galvanized, ferrous metal surfaces ofpipes, conduits, ducts, equipment, fixtures, hangers, supports and accessories as follows: 1. Exposed andConcealed -one prime coat ofprimer and one coat of oil varnishbased paint, color selectedby Architect. 2. Underground -two coats ofblack asphaltum paint. 3. The inside of allductwork where visible through openings shallbe painted with two prime coats of dull black paint. B. Nameplates on all equipment shallbe cleaned andleft free ofpaint. One finish coat of enamel color to be identified by architects. PART 2 – PRODUCTS 2.1 QUALITY CONTROL A. Manufacturers of equipment or materials willfallinto one of the following categories: 1. “Basis ofDesign” -The manufacturer of equipment or materials listed on the Drawings or first named in the Specifications. If the Drawings and Specifications are in conflict, the drawings shall take precedence. 2. “Approved Equal” -Manufacturers whose products are listed in the Specifications under “Approved Equal” 3. “Substitution” -Manufacturers whose products are not listedin the Specifications. B. Requirements applicable to all submittals: 1. Refer to Section 230502/2.2 -GeneralSubmittalRequirements 2. Provide Specification Compliance with allSubmittals: a. Contractor/Manufacturer shall submit the all relevant specification sections within the submittalindicating that they comply with eachline item of each of the relevant specification section(s). For any item that doesn’t comply, the contractor/manufacture shall clearly indicate why not and how their product meets or exceeds the requirement of that line item. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  C. Requirements applicable to submission of “ApprovedEquals”: 1. Thesubmittalshallincludeacoversheetindicatingthefollowing,signedbythecontractor: a. The proposedproduct will not affect dimensions shown on Drawings. b. The contractor will pay for changes to the building design, including engineering design, detailing, and construction costs caused by the submission. c. The proposed product will have no adverse effect on other trades, the construction schedule, operation and maintenance, and specified warranty requirements. d. Maintenance and service parts willbe locally available for the proposedproduct. 2. The contractor shall be responsible for coordinating the required dimensions, clearances, access points and other service locations such that the submitted product properly fits in the available space allocated for the Basis of Design. 3. Provide allfeatures which are standard on the Basis ofDesign, whether or not specifically specified or scheduled. D. Requirements applicable to submission of “Substitutions”: 1. Products by manufacturers not listed in the specifications may not be used as the basis of the bid price. 2. Substitution Request Form: Use Architect's Substitution Request Form, if one is not provided by the architect, utilize CSIStandard Form 13.1A. 3. Documentation: Show compliance with requirements for substitutions and the following, as applicable: a. Statement indicating why specified material or product cannot be provided. b. Coordination information, including a list of changes or modifications needed to other parts of the Work and to construction performed by Owner and separate contractors that will be necessary to accommodate proposed substitution. c. Detailed comparison of significant qualities of proposed substitution with those of the Work specified. Significant qualities may include attributes such as performance, weight, dimension, durability, visual effect, and specific features and requirements indicated. d. Product Data, including drawings and descriptions of products and fabrication and installation procedures. e. Operation, maintenance, and efficiencydifference. f. Samples, where applicable or requested. g. Listofsimilar installationsforcompletedprojectswithproject names andaddresses and names and addresses of architects and owners. h. Material test reports from a qualified testing agency indicating and interpreting test results for compliance with requirements indicated. i. Research/evaluation reports evidencing compliance withbuilding code in effect. ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 j. Detailed comparison of Contractor's Construction Schedule using proposed substitution with products specified for the Work, including effect on the overall Contract Time. If specified product or method of construction cannot be provided within the Contract Time, include letter from manufacturer, on manufacturer's letterhead, statinglack of availability or delays in delivery. k. Cost information, including aproposal of change, if any, in the Contract Sum. l. Contractor's certification that proposed substitution complies with requirements in the Contract Documents and is appropriate for applications indicated. m. Contractor's waiver of rights to additional payment or time that may subsequently become necessary because of failure of proposed substitution to produce indicated results. 4. A/E will review Substitution Request andindicate one of the following actions: a. Substitution Request Approved as Noted -Make submittals in accordance with “Approved Equal” Requirements. b. Substitution Request Rejected -Use specified materials. 5. Under no circumstances should the substitution result in added cost to the project. E. Shopdrawings shall not be submittedprior to approval of all equipment submittals. F. The materials, workmanship, design, and arrangement of all work installed under the Contract shall be subject to the approval of the Architect or Engineer. G. Ifmaterialorequipmentisinstalledbeforeitisapproved,eachtradeinstallingsameshallbeliable fortheremovalandreplacementatnoextrachargetotheOwnerif,intheopinionoftheArchitect or Engineer, the material or equipment does not meet the intent of the Drawings and Specifications. H. ItistheintentoftheseSpecificationsthatwherevera“BasisofDesign”manufacturerofaproduct is specified, the submitted item must conform in all respects to the “Basis of Design” specified item. Consideration will not be given to claim that the substituted item meets the performance requirementswithlesser construction(suchaslesserheatexchangesurface,reducedhorsepower, etc.). Performance as delineated in schedules and in the Specifications shall be interpreted as minimum performance. I. Beinglistedin the specifications as a“Basis ofDesign” or “ApprovedEqual” manufacturer does notpermitthemanufacturertoprovide standardmanufacturedequipmentwhichdoes notcomply with the performance and/or physical characteristic requirements of the Contract Documents. J. All equipment and materials requiredfor installation under these Specifications shallbe new and without blemish or defect. All electrical equipment shall bear labels attesting to Underwriter's Laboratories approval. Where no specific indication as to the type or quality of the material or equipment is indicated, a first class standard article shall be furnished. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  K. Where it is proposed to use an item of equipment other than specified “Basis of Design” which requires any redesign ofthe structure, partitions, foundations, piping, wiring, or of any other part of the mechanical, electrical, or architectural layout, all such redesign, and all new drawings and detailing required therefore shall, with the approval of the Architect or Engineer, be prepared at no additional cost to the Owner. On multiple prime contracts the substituting contractor shall negotiate with other prime contractors to have alternate work performed without cost to the owner. L. All equipment of one type (such as fan coil units, etc.) shall be the product of the same manufacturer. M. Note that the approval of shop drawings or other information submitted in accordance with the requirements hereinbefore specified does not assure that the Engineer, Architect, or any other Owner's representative attests to the dimensional accuracy or dimensional suitability of the material or equipment involved or the mechanical performance of equipment. Approval of shop drawingsdoesnotinvalidatethePlansandSpecificationsiftheshopdrawingsareinconflictwith the Plans and Specifications. N. With regard to proprietary or partially proprietary systems, including but not limited to building automation, automatic temperature controls, fire alarm, signaling, monitoring, data center alarm systems, etc., the specification of system components by a single manufacturer shall not be questioned. No discussion about inter-operability or open protocols will be considered. Contractorshallassumethatengineerhaspreviouslyconsideredsubstitutionsofnon.proprietary systems or open protocols and rejected this option. GENERAL SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS A. After receipt of notice to proceed, eachdivision shall submit atypedlist of submittals and the schedule date of submission for the engineer/architect to review. The list shallinclude submittal number, section number, and scheduled date of submission. B. Coordination andSequencing: 1. Coordinate submittals 2weeks (min.)prior to expected order date so that work will not be delayed by submittals. 2. No extension of time willbe allowedbecause offailure to properly coordinate and sequence submittals. 3. Do not submit product data, or allow its use on the project until compliance with requirement of Contract Documents has been confirmed by Contractor. 4. Submittalis for information and record, unless otherwise indicated, andis not achange order request. Approval of alternate equipment or notations on shopdrawings shall not be considered to be approval of additional cost. 5. Submitting contractor is responsible for routing reviewed submittals to allparties affected including but not limited to electrical, temperature control, and test andbalance subcontractors. 6. All submittals requiring expedited review shallbe made at the start of the project. Submittals requiring expedited review due to delay of submission will be reviewed on ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  engineeringpremium time which willbe back-charged to the contractor. C. Preparation ofSubmittals: 1. Refer to Division 1requirements. 2. Provide permanent marking on each submittal to identifyproject, date, Contractor, Subcontractor, Supplier, submittal name and similar information to distinguishit from other submittals. 3. Indicate anyportions of work whichdeviate from the Contract Documents. a. Explain the reasons for the deviations. b. Show how suchdeviations coordinate withinterfacingportions of other work. 4. Show Contractor’s executed review and approval marking. 5. Provide space for Architect’s/Engineer’s “Action” marking. 6. Submittals which are receivedfrom sources other than throughContractor’s office willbe returned “Without Action”. 7. Submittals shallbe presentedin aneat andlegible fashion and shallbe returned “Without Action” if presented in any other fashion. 8. Electronic submittals shallbe subject to aminimum $50document processing charge per submittal up to 50letter size pages or 15 sq. ft. of wide format printing. Larger quantities willbe subject to increased charges. Charges shallbe deductedfrom payments to the Contractor by the owner. 9. Contractor is responsible for submission of shopdrawings in accordance withplans and specifications for compliance with the system description and manufacturer. Shop drawings submitted, which are not in substantial compliance requires additional and unnecessary review time by the Engineer andArchitect. Shopdrawings submitted more than once, which are not in substantial compliance, shall be reviewed at arate of$225 per hour and charged to the contractor. Charges shallbe deductedfrom payment to the contractor by the owner. D. Quantities: Unless otherwise indicatedin Division 1, submit six copies. 1. Refer to Division 1requirements. 2. Multiple System Items: Where arequired submittal relates to an operation or item of equipment usedin more than one system, increase the number of final copies as necessary to complete the Maintenance Manuals for each system. 3. PreliminarySubmittal: Provide apreliminary, two-copy submittalfor automatic temperature controls and when product data is required(or desired by Contractor)for selection of options by Architect/Engineer. 4. General Distribution: a. Provide additionaldistribution of submittals (not includedin foregoing copy submittal requirements) to Subcontractors, Suppliers, Fabricators, Installers, Governing Authorities and others as necessaryfor proper performance of the work. b. Include such additional copies in transmittal to Architect/Engineer where required to receive “Action” marking before final distribution. 1) Show suchdistributions on transmittalforms. ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 E. Response to Submittals: Where standardproduct data have been submitted, it is recognized: 1. That the Submitter has determined that the products fulfill the specified requirements. 2. That the submittalis for the Architect’s or Engineer’s information only, but willbe returned with appropriate action where observed to be not in compliance with the requirements. F. If more than two submissions (either for shopdrawings, as-built drawings, or test andbalance reports) are made by the contractor, the Owner reserves the right to charge the contractor for subsequent reviews by their consultants. Such extra fees shallbe deductedfrom payments by the Owner to the contractor. SPECIFIC CATEGORYSUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS A. Manufacturer’s Data: 1. Where pre-printeddata covers more than one distinct product, size, type, material, trim, accessory group or other variation, mark submitted copy withblack pen to indicate which of the variations is to be provided. 2. Delete or mark-out significant portions ofpre-printeddata which are not applicable. 3. Where operating ranges are shown, markdata to show portion of range requiredfor project application. 4. For eachproduct, include the following: a. Sizes b. Weights c. Speeds d. Capacities e. Piping and electrical connection sizes andlocations. f. Statements of compliance with the required standards and regulations. g. Performance data. h. Manufacturer’s specifications andinstallation instructions. i. Certifiedperformance curves for allpumping andfan equipment shallbe submittedfor approval. j. Samples of materials or equipment, when requestedby the Architect, shallbe submittedfor approval. k. Samples, drawings, specifications, catalogs, etc., submittedfor approval, shallbe properlylabeled indicatingproject name, specific service for which material or equipment is to be used, Section and Article number ofSpecifications. l. Catalogs, pamphlets, or other documents submitted to describe items on which approvalis being requested, shall be specific andidentification in catalog, pamphlet, etc., ofitem submitted shallbe clearly made in ink. Data of ageneral nature will not be accepted. m. Approval rendered on shopdrawings shall not be considered as aguarantee of measurements or building conditions. Where drawings are approved, said approvaldoes not in any was relieve responsibility, or necessity, of furnishing material or performing work as required by the Contract Drawings and Specifications. ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 n. Prior to submission of shopdrawings, thoroughly check each shopdrawing, reject those not conforming to the Specifications, and indicate (by signature) that the shop drawings submitted meet Contract Requirements. o. All shopdrawings showing routing ofductwork, piping and conduit, shallbe not less than 3/8" = 1'0" scale. B. Shop Drawings: 1. Prepare MechanicalShopDrawings, except diagrams, to accurate scale. a. Show clearance dimensions at criticallocations. b. Show dimensions of spaces requiredfor operation and maintenance. c. Show interfaces with other work, including structural support. C. Test Reports: 1. Submit test reports whichhave been signed anddatedby the firm performing the test. 2. Prepare test reports in the manner specifiedin the standard or regulation governing the test procedure (if any) as indicated. D. Required equipment and shop drawing submittals: 1. Provide asubmittal schedule withbid. 2. Provide equipment submittals for eachitem of equipment specified or scheduledin the contract documents. 3. SubmittalSchedule shall show eachitem of equipment, applicable Section of the specifications where it is described, applicable Drawing number and schedule name where it is scheduled, date of Contractor’s proposed submittal to Architect, required date to receive submittalfrom Architect and schedule order date. 4. Provide aMechanicalShopDrawingSchedule for submission to the Architect with the SubmittalSchedule. 5. Before request for acceptance andfinalpayment for the work, write aletter to the Architect stating that all shop drawings are brought to a condition "Reviewed" or "Exception as Noted ". Any outstanding shopdrawings must be cleared with the Engineer. E. Submit shopdrawings covering the followingitems: 1. Coordination drawings. 2. Internal cleaning and treating ofpiping. 3. Sleeve andductworkpenetration drawings. 4. Identification schedule and samples. 5. Rooftop Heat Pumps. 6. Air filters and draft gauges. 7. Expansion joints, anchors andguides, includingdetails ofinstallation. 8. Air diffusers, registers andgrilles. 9. Schedule ofductwork, joints, gauges, supports, flexible connections, fire dampers, access doors, etc. 10. Utilityfans, centrifugalfans, andpower roof ventilators andpropeller fans. 11. Sheet metalfabrication drawings. 12. Schedule ofpiping andfitting materials. 13. Piping shopdrawings. 14. Schedule of valves, strainers, vacuum breakers. 15. Thermometers andpressure gauges. 16. Expansion tanks. 17. Schedule ofpipe andductwork supports, includinginserts, escutcheons, etc. 18. Heating systems, including unit heaters, cabinet heaters, baseboard, radiation, convectors, etc., as specified. 19. Outside air supply unit including coils, filters, draft gauges, etc. 20. Fan coil units, cabinet heaters, and unit heaters. 21. All motor starters, motor controldevices and motor control centers. 22. Schedule ofinsulation types and samples of each type. 23. Vibration isolation schedule includinginertia blockdetails. 24. Templates for equipment bases. 25. Acoustic material(internalduct lining). 26. VAV and constant air valve boxes. 27. Building management system. 28. Air vents, air separators, water strainers, reducing safety valves for water systems. 29. Diesel generator system. 30. Concrete padlocation and size. 31. All air and water cooled condensers. 32. Fuel oil tank and all accessories. 33. All water source heat pumps. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  F. All shopdrawings being submitted that include electrical work shallbe submitted with all internal and external wiringdiagrams. G. The previouslylisteditems are major equipment anddo not limit this Division's responsibility to submit shop drawings for all equipment and accessories which are to be provided under this Division of the Specifications. GREEN BUILDING REQUIREMENTS AND PERFORMANCE CRITERIA A. Green Building Performance Criteria: 1. Allfield-applied concrete admixtures, adhesives, sealants, paints and coatings usedfor interior applications shall meet the volatile organic compound (VOC) and chemical component limitations as definedin architects specification or as required to obtain relevant LEED credit. B. Green BuildingSubmittalRequirements: The Contractor and their sub-contractors shall submit the GREEN BUILDING CERTIFICATION items listedherein. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  1. GBMCF: Submit a completed GREEN BUILDING MATERIALS CERTIFICATION FORM which willbe providedby the architect or engineer. Information to be supplied for this form shall include: a. Cost breakdowns for the materials includedin the Contractor or sub-contractor’s work. Cost breakdowns shallinclude total cost plus itemized material costs for and VOC containing products. 2. Validation: Publishedproduct literature or manufacturer’s letter of certification (on the manufacturer’s letterhead) validating all information, other than costs, providedin the GBMCF. 3. Cut Sheets: Product cut sheets for materials listedin the GBMCF. Cut sheets shallbe submitted with the Contractor or Trade Contractor’s stamp, confirming that the submitted products are the products installed in the Project. 4. VOCContent: MaterialSafetyData Sheets (MSDS), publishedproduct literature, or manufacturer’s signed certification (on manufacturer’s letterhead) stating the VOC content of all applicable products. 5. SubmittalPackage: The GREENBUILDING submittalinformation shallbe assembled into one (1)package per Section or trade, and sent to the Consultant for review. Incomplete or inaccurate Green Building submittals may be used as the basis for rejecting the submittedproducts or assemblies. COMPATIBILITY A. General: Provide products which are compatible with other products of the mechanical work, and with other work requiring interface with the mechanical work. B. Altitude Ratings: Except where noted otherwise, all ratings and capacities statedin the Contract Documents are at the altitude of the project. C. Fuel Characteristics: 1. Review fuel characteristics with the FuelSupplier designatedby the Owner. 2. Determine burner or combustion equipment provisions neededfor optimum performance. Provide equipment accordingly. D. Power Characteristics: 1. For power characteristics of equipment supplied under Division 21, 22 and23Sections, refer to the Sections of Divisions 26, 27 and 28 and the Electrical Drawings for the power characteristics of each power driven item of mechanical equipment. 2. Coordinate available power withElectricalContractor before ordering equipment. MechanicalContractor shall be responsible for ordering equipment to meet the available power characteristics. 3. See also Division 230501 of these specifications. 4. If there is aconflict between Divisions 21, 22 and23documents andDivisions 26, 27 and 28documents, alert the engineer. Do not order equipment prior to determining the proper electrical service. No contract cost adjustment willbe allowedfor equipment orderedin conflict with the available power characteristics. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  SAFETY PROVISIONS A. Equipment Nameplates: Provide power-operated mechanical equipment with apermanent nameplate attached by the manufacturer, indicating: 1. The manufacturer 2. Product name 3. Model number 4. Serial number 5. Speed 6. Capacity 7. Power characteristics 8. Labels of testing, listing, or inspecting agencies 9. Other similar data B. Where manufacturer affixed nameplate is not available, MechanicalContractor shallfabricate and attach nameplate. C. Guards: 1. Unless equivalent guards are providedintegral with the equipment, enclose eachbelt drive (including sheaves) on both side in a galvanized, one inch, mesh screen of No. 18 gauge steel wire or expanded metal, fastened to an approved, structural steel frame, securely fastened to the equipment or floor. 2. Provide tachometer holes at shaft centers. Unless equivalent guards are providedintegral with the equipment, install a solid guard of No. 20 gauge galvanized steel over the coupling of eachitem of direct-driven equipment. D. Refrigerant 1. Any refrigeration system containing any refrigerants listedin the Clean Air Act as aClass Ior Class IIOzone Depleting Compound shall comply with the Clean Air Act. 2. As aminimum all systems shallbe equipped with refrigerant recovery service valves, relief valves capable of resetting after activation, and for system with more than 50 pounds of charge, andisolateable receiver and/or condenser capable ofholding the complete charge. 3. Any refrigerant removedfrom systems shallbe recoveredin accordance withClean Air Act. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  PART 3 – EXECUTION 3.1 COORDINATIONOFMECHANICALINSTALLATION A. Inspection andPreparation: 1. Examine the workinterfacing with mechanical work, and the conditions under which the work will be performed, and notify the Architect/Engineer of conditions detrimental to the proper completion of the work at original contract price. 2. Do not proceed with the work until unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected. B. Layout: 1. Layout the mechanical workin conformity with the Contract Drawings, Coordination Drawings and other ShopDrawings, product data and similar requirements so that the entire mechanical plant willperform as an integrated system, properlyinterfaced with other work, recognizing that portions of the work are shown onlyin diagrammatic form. 2. Where coordination requirements conflict withindividual system requirements, comply with the Architect’s or Engineer’s decision on resolution of the conflict. 3. Take necessaryfield measurements to determine space and connection requirements. 4. Provide sizes and shapes of equipment so the finalinstallation conforms to the intent of the Contract Documents. C. Integrate mechanical workin ceiling spaces with suspension system, light fixtures and other work so that requiredperformances of each willbe achieved. Modification ofduct work sizes from contract documents to sheet metal shop drawings for coordination purposes shall be includedin the contractor’s scope of work, confirm new ductwork dimensions with the engineer. 3.2 PRODUCT INSTALLATION A. Manufacturer’s Instructions: 1. Except where more stringent requirements are indicated, comply with the product manufacturer’s instructions and recommendations. 2. Consult with manufacturer’s technical representatives, who are recognized as technical experts, for specific instructions on special project conditions. 3. If aconflict exists, notify the Architect/Engineer in writing and obtain his instruction before proceeding with the work in question. B. Movement of Equipment: 1. Wherever possible, arrange for the movement andpositioning of equipment so that enclosing partitions, walls and roofs will not be delayed or need to be removed. 2. Otherwise, advise other Contractors of opening requirements to be maintainedfor the subsequent entry of equipment. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  C. Heavy Equipment: 1. Coordinate the movement ofheavyitems with shoring andbracing so that the building structure will not be overloaded during the movement and installation. D. Return Air Path: Coordinate mechanical workin return air plenum to avoid obstructing return air path. 1. Do not make changes in layout which will reduce return air path cross-sectional areas. Minimum cross-sectional area will provide an average of 250fpm and amaximum of 750 fpm velocity through return air plenum at specified supply air quantity unless otherwise noted. 2. Provide openings in anyfullheight walls to allow for free movement of return air. Openings are to be sizedfor 500-750fpm velocity. Provide fire or fire/smoke dampers at openings in fire rated walls, even if not specifically shown on the drawings. 3. Report any obstructions by work of other Divisions to Architect/Engineer. 4. Eachdivision shall conform to the requirements ofNFPA andlocal code requirements for all materials installedin the return air plenum. E. Coordinate location of allfloor mounted work(piping, ductwork, supports, etc.)in all areas (including mechanical rooms) to avoid obstruction of egress path. F. Clearances: 1. Installpiping andductwork: a. Straight and true. b. Aligned with other work. c. Close to walls and overhead structure (allowingfor insulation). d. Concealed, where possible, in finished spaces. e. Out-of-the-way with maximum passageway andheadroom remainingin each space. 2. Except as otherwise indicated, arrange mechanical services and overhead equipment with a minimum of: a. 8’-0” headroom in storage spaces. b. 8’6” headroom in other spaces; where approvedbyArchitect. 3. Do not obstruct windows, doors or other openings. 4. Give the right-of-way to piping systems required to slope for drainage (over other service lines and ductwork). 5. Coordinate and maintain all manufacturer’s recommended service clearances around all equipment. G. Access: 1. Provide for removal, without damage to other parts, of: a. Coils b. Shafts c. Fan wheels d. Drives e. Filters f. Bearings g. Control components h. Other parts requiringperiodic replacement or maintenance ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  2. Connect equipment for ease ofdisconnecting with minimum ofinterference with other work. 3. Provide unions where required. 4. Locate operating and control equipment anddevices for each access. 5. Provide access panels where units are concealedby non-accessible finishes and similar work. 6. Extend allgrease fittings to an accessible location. 3.3 PROTECTIONOFWORK A. Allpipe ends, valves, ducts, and equipment left unconnected shallbe capped, plugged or otherwise properly protected to prevent damage or the intrusion of foreign matter. B. Do not allow anyfans in the HVAC system to operate before the area servedby the fan has been cleaned and vacuumed of alldebris and dust which might enter the system. C. Any equipment, duct or piping systems found to have been damaged or contaminated above “MILL” or “SHOP” conditions shall be replaced or cleaned to the Engineer’s satisfaction. D. Provide initial water sealfillfor all waste P-traps, condensate traps, or similar traps. 3.4 PROTECTIONOFPOTABLEWATERSYSTEMS A. All temporary water connections shallbe made with an approvedbackflow preventer. B. Allhose bibs shallhave as aminimum, avacuum breaker, to prevent backflow. C. Direct connections to hydronic systems shall onlybe made through areducedpressure zone backflow preventer. Backflow drain shallbe piped to drain to nearest floor drain or mopsink. 3.5 REFRIGERATION SYSTEMS A. All techniques involvedin the installation of refrigeration systems shallbe by certified staff trainedin accordance with the state andlocal requirements, and the applicable sections of the Clean Air Act. B. No refrigerant shallbe intentionally vented to the atmosphere. All refrigerant shallbe recoveredbefore opening aclosed system for charging, evacuation or service. Equipment being demolished that contains R-170, R-290, R-600, R-600W, R-1150, R-1270 type refrigerants shall be subject to the approval of the commissioner of the Fire Department. C. All refrigerant installed shallbe new unless approvedby the Engineer. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  D. The Contractor shallbe responsible and accountable for compliance with the EPAClean Air Act (CAA) Section 608, 40CFR Part 82 and any state or local codes for all refrigerant related work. In general, an EPA-certified technician shallperform any activityinvolving refrigerant-containing equipment that includes: (1) attaching anddetachinghoses andgauges to andfrom refrigerant containing equipment to measure pressure;(2) adding refrigerant to, or removing refrigerant from equipment; or (3) any other activity that violates the integrity of arefrigerant containing circuit (for example any activity where arefrigerant containing circuit is ‘opened’ in any manner). E. Refrigerant and oil shallbe recoveredfrom any equipment that does not meet the definition of a small appliance in 40CFRPart 82Subpart Fbefore removal and subsequent disposal. Small appliances (as definedin 40CFR Part 82 Subpart F) may be removedfrom the site with the charge (refrigerant)intact, providedit is properly labeled and handledin such amanner so as to prevent damage to coils. SmallAppliances are definedin 40CFRPart 82Subpart Fas: Any appliance that is fully manufactured, charged, and hermetically sealedin afactory withfive (5) pounds or less of a Class Ior Class II substance used as a refrigerant, including, but not limited to, refrigerators and freezers (designedfor home, commercial, or consumer use), medical or industrial research refrigeration equipment, room air conditioners (including window air conditioners and packaged terminal air heat pumps), dehumidifiers, under-the-counter ice makers, vending machines, anddrinking water coolers. F. All new equipment installed shall utilize non-CFC refrigerants. G. Prior to starting construction, demolition, or service workContractor shallprovide to Owner a list of all service technicians withEPA certification numbers and level of certification. (Copies of EPA certification cards are acceptable for those who willbe working on the site.) H. Contractor shallprovide to the Owners Representative allService Invoices (or equivalent service documentation acceptable to owner)for all work performedby EPA-certified Technicians. Service Invoices (or equivalent documentation) shallinclude the following information at a minimum for each piece of refrigerant containing equipment serviced: • Date of Service • Name of EPA-Certified Technician • Technicians Certification Level • Type of Equipment Serviced • Equipment Manufacture • Equipment Model and Serial Number • Description of Service Performed • Date Leak Discovered(if applicable) • Date Leak Repaired(if applicable) • Date Follow-Up Leak Test Performed(if applicable) • Type of Refrigerant • Normal System Full Charge (in pounds) • Amount of Initial Refrigerant Charge Recovered During Service • Amount of Recovered Refrigerant Returned to System • Type of Additional Refrigerant Added to System • Amount of Additional Refrigerant Charged to System • System Charge at End ofService ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  I. Contractor shallprovide Owners Representative acopy of complete manifests, invoices, or other documentation showing any refrigerant removedfrom the project by the contractor was disposed of appropriately or reclaimed by an EPA-certified Reclaimer. 3.6 LEAK TESTING A. All new equipment not meeting the definition of asmall appliance, includingpackaged equipment, factory charged, field charged, split systems or field-constructed systems withfield.installed refrigerant piping shall be leak tested prior to or during startup. Leak testing shall utilize appropriate electronic leak-testing equipment. B. Leak testing shallbe conductedby an EPA-certified technician. The contractor shallprovide written verification of the leak testing and results. C. If aleakis detected, the followingprocedure shallbe followed: 1. Notify the Owner’s Site Representative (who will notify the Refrigerant Compliance Coordinator). 2. Document the leak. 3. Repair the leak. 4. Document the procedures followed. 5. Leak test to verify the leak was repaired. 6. Schedule and provide a 30-day follow-up verification leak test witnessed by a designated HVAC technician. 7. Document follow-upleak testing. 8. Repeat the above process iffollow-upleakis detected. 3.7 DEMOLITION PROCEDURE FOR REFRIGERATION EQUIPMENT REMOVED BY CONTRACTOR A. The Contractor, in contractor-provided refrigerant recovery cylinders, shall take ownership of the recovered refrigerant and transport off site to a proper disposal company or certified reclaimer. B. Service Invoices, as describedin RECORDDOCUMENTS, shallbe provided. C. The Contractor technician shall tag the unit that the refrigerant was removed. D. Once an EPA-certified technician has removed the refrigerant and tagged the unit, a noncertified person may perform the remainder of the demolition. ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 3.8 START-UP A. Tests shallbe performed to the satisfaction of the Architect. The Architect willbe present at such test, when he deems necessary and such other parties as may have legal jurisdiction. B. Pressure tests shallbe applied to piping onlybefore connection of equipment andinstallation of insulation. In no case shallpiping, equipment, or accessories be subjected to pressure exceeding their rating. C. Alldefective work shallbe promptly repaired or replaced and the tests shallbe repeated until the particular system and component parts thereof receive the approval of the Architect. D. Anydamages resultingfrom tests shallbe repaired or replaced and the tests shallbe repeated until the particular system and component parts thereof receive the approval of the Architect. E. The duration of tests shallbe as determinedby all authorities havingjurisdiction, but in no case less than the time prescribed in each Section of the Specification. F. Equipment and systems which normally operate during certain seasons of the year shallbe testedduring the appropriate season. Tests shallbe performed on individual equipment, systems, and their controls. Whenever the equipment or system under test is interrelated with and depends upon the operation of other equipment, systems and controls for proper operation, functioning, and performance, the latter shallbe operated simultaneously with the equipment or system being tested. G. The electrical work shallinclude providing any assistance (such as removal of switchboard and panelboard trims and covers, pull and junction box covers, etc.) deemed necessaryby the Architect to check compliance with the Drawings andSpecifications. H. The Contractor shall assign aPlumbing, Fire Protection andHVACStart-UpCoordinator to this project. I. TheStart-UpCoordinatorshalldevelopdetailedstart-upprocedures,equipmentcheckout proceduresanddataformsforrecordingcompliance with contractdocumentperformancecriteria, andwillassistindevelopingschedulesforcheckoutandOwneracceptance. J. ThePlumbing,FireProtectionandHVACContractorsshallincludeaspartofthe work ofthis contract,manpower,equipment,tools,ladders,instruments,etc.necessarytoconfirm start-upof Plumbing, FireProtectionandHVACsystems. K. TheTest, AdjustandBalancingContractorshallincludeaspartoftheworkofhis/hercontract, laborandmaterialtoprovidemanpower,equipment,tools,ladders,instruments,etc.necessaryto assisttheStart-UpCoordinatorinaccomplishinghis/herwork. L. TheStart-UpCoordinatorshallberesponsibleformaintainingdocumentation ofStart-Up activities untilfinalacceptance oftheproject. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  M. Thedocumentationshallbekeptcurrentbythe Start-UpCoordinatorandshallbeavailablefor inspectionatalltimes. Atthetimeofacceptanceoftheproject,theStart-UpCoordinatorshall surrender3completed copies ofthedocumentationtothe Owner'srepresentative. N. BeforeTesting, Adjusting,CalibrationandBalancing,theStart-UpCoordinatorshall confirm,in writingtothe Owner,thefollowing: 1. All equipment, components,andsystemshave beenset,started-up,andadjusted. 2. Systemshavebeenestablishedattheappropriatetemperatures andpressuresforproper operationandperformance. 3. All electricpowerconnections,disconnects,fuses, circuitbreakers,etc. are properlysized andinstalled. 4. Theoperation ofall valves,dampersandsensorsis positive(perthe controlsequences)and demonstrated. O. Provide datedmatricesforeachitem ofequipmentshowingthe dateeach ofthestart-up activities waswitnessedor performedbytheStart-UpCoordinator. 1. Start-up and operatingperformance test documentation shallinclude allDivision 21, 22 and 23 equipment with scheduled or rated capacities. P. At the completion of the start-up; and test andbalance, Plumbing, HVAC andFire Protection contractors shall conduct a72 hour dynamic mode demonstration of the systems in the presence of the Owner andArchitect/Engineer. Contractor shallbe available during the period to adjust equipment operation or setpoints. The engineer maydirect the contractor to implement new control sequences or alter system installation in response to data collected during start-up. Work that can be completed by staff assigned to start-up that can be completed in the time period assigned to the start-up shallbe completed with out additional cost to the owner. Q. The Owner may require operation ofparts or all of the installation for the beneficial occupancy to final completion and acceptance of the building. The operation shall not be construed to mean acceptance of the workby the Engineer for the Owner. The Owner willfurnish supervisory personnel to direct operation of the entire system and the Contractor shall continue to assume this responsibility untilfinal acceptance. DEMONSTRATION A. Refer to Architectural sections of the specifications regarding requirements ofRecordDrawings and Operation and Maintenance Manual submittal and systems demonstration. 1. Demonstrate to the Architect/Engineer that each system operates in accordance with the contract documents. 2. Explain the operation of each system to the Owner’s Representative. Explain use of O&M manualin operating and maintaining systems. B. Date and time ofdemonstration willbe determinedbyOwner. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  C. Demonstration Requirements. 1. Provide apoint-to-point check-out of100% ofBMS controlledpoints for all equipment. 3.10 PROJECT CLOSEOUT A. Refer to the individual sections of the specifications for individual closeout requirements. B. Provide awritten schedule of when systems are to be started up, tested anddemonstrated along withdates for completion of the temperature controls andbalancing. This schedule shallbe submitted no later than 30days prior to starting up and testing equipment. C. The contractor shall notify the Architect/Engineer no later than 2weeks in advance of system testing or demonstration. END OF SECTION 23 0502 ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 SECTION 23 34 00 -FANS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 QUALITY CONTROL A. Provide fans with AMCA performance certification and label. B. Allfans with1HP motors andlarger shallhave aFan EnergyIndex (FEI) of not less than 1.00 at the highest design point of operation. FEI shall be calculatedin accordance with AMCA 208. All fans shall be provided with FEIlabelingby the manufacturer. 1.2 RELATED SECTIONS A. Section 230900: BuildingAutomation andAutomatic Temperature ControlSystem B. Section 233300: DuctworkAccessories 1.3 MOTOR HORSEPOWER A. Do not increase or decrease motor horsepower from that specified without written approval from Architect/Engineer. See Section 23 05 01. 1.4 SUBMITTALS A. Manufacturer’s Data: Submit manufacturer’s product data including: 1. Performance 2. FEI 3. Size 4. Type 5. Options provided 6. Fan curves 7. Indicate Compliance withSection 1.1 where applicable. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 IN-LINE CENTRIFUGAL FAN A. Manufacturers: 1. Design Basis: As scheduled 2. Acceptable Manufacturers: a. Greenheck b. Cook c. Trane d. Aerovent ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 e. Carrier f. Jenn Air g. Penn h. American Coolair i. Powerline j. Twin City k. Carnes B. Cabinet: Steel, insulated, baked enamelfinish with access panel. C. Wheel: Cast aluminum Airfoil, statically anddynamicallybalanced. Cast aluminum hub. D. Bearings: Heavydutypillow blackin enclosedduct with externalgrease fittings. E. Guards: Belt. F. Drive: See Schedule. G. The fans shallbe the square shaped and ofheavygauge formed steel. One of the sides shallbe hinged and shall support the entire drive assembly(motor onlyfor direct drive fans) and wheel allowing the assembly to swing out for cleaning, inspection or service without dismantling the unit in any way. H. For direct drive fans, the motor shallbe isolatedfrom the air stream by amotor enclosure and shall draw cooling air from outside the fan housing. I. For belt drive fans, the motor shallbe mounted on the hinged side exterior isolatedfrom air stream. The belt andpillow blockballbearings shallbe protectedfrom air stream by an enclosure. The shaft shallbe keyed to both the wheel andpulley. J. The fan inlet shallbe spun Venturi throat overlappedby abackward curved centrifugal wheel with spun cone for maximum performance. K. Air and sound shall be A.M.C.A. certified. L. Installfan with spring type vibration isolators, threaded rods and expansion shields. ROOFTOP MUSHROOM FAN A. Manufacturers: 1. Design Basis: As scheduled 2. Acceptable Manufacturers: 3. Greenheck 4. Cook 5. Carrier ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 B. Fan housing shallbe spun aluminum. C. Cabinet: Aluminum. D. Wheel: Cast aluminum Airfoil, statically anddynamicallybalanced. Cast aluminum hub. E. Bearings: Heavydutypillow blackin enclosedduct with externalgrease fittings. F. Guards: Belt. G. Drive: See Schedule. H. Install fan with hinged curb. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 NOISE AND VIBRATION A. Insure that fans are properly supported on vibration isolators. Reference Section 230548for Vibration Isolation Requirements. B. Insure that flexible duct connections are properly made. C. Checkfan for improper balance andhave fan re-balancedif necessary. D. Check for proper rotation. E. Checkfor unusual noise or vibration and correct as necessary. 3.2 ACCESS A. Provide for proper access to allparts offan needinginspection or service with access doors in fan or ductwork. 3.3 INSTALLATION A. Install units level andplumb. B. Provide necessary auxiliary supporting steel. C. Mount motor anddrives so belts run true. D. Provide necessary lubrication. E. Provide flexible duct connections on inlet anddischarge. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  F. Provide 460v/120v transfer to serve controls and convenience outlet at all460v fans. G. Provide unfuseddisconnect of suitable capacity. Disconnect shallbe weatherproof where installed outside or in a location subject to wetness. H. Provide vibration isolators as recommendedby manufacturer and other sections of this specification. I. Provide ahingedbase at all up-blast fans. 3.4 CURBS A. Provide necessarydimensions anddetails so roof opening can be provided at the proper time. B. Coordinate delivery of curb with roofing contractor so project is not delayed. C. Provide a weatherproof installation: 1. Seal alljoints including, but not limited to: a. Unit and curb. b. Unit and ducts. END OF SECTION 23 3400 ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  SECTION 23 35 00 – LAUNDRY EXHAUST SYSTEM PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SUMMARY A. This system shallprovide constant exhaust pressures requiredby the heating appliance being vented. The following are components of the system: 1. LFSystems LaundryExhaust System, ETL-listed to ULSTD705. 2. Electrical connections, byinstalling contractor. 1.2 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Section 230900: BuildingAutomation andAutomatic Temperature ControlSystem B. Section 233300: DuctworkAccessories 1.3 CODES AND STANDARDS A. The followingpublished specification standards, test or recommended methods of trade, industry or governmental organizations apply to workin the section: 1. UL –Underwriters Laboratories. 2. ANSIZ223.1 3. NFPA211 4. National Electrical Code. 1.4 SUBMITTALS A. Submittaldocuments shallbe providedby the local manufacturer’s representative. B. The following shallbe submitted to the Owner’s representative: 1. All relevant data sheets for the clothes dryer booster, supplyfan and related controls. 2. Wiringdiagrams andinstallation manuals shallbe submitted to the installing contractor prior to installation. 3. Certification oflistingfor the actual application by an OSHA approvedNRTLincluding the authorization to mark for the respective products. C. Alternate manufactures complying withplans and specifications must be submitted and approvedby the ConsultingEngineer within 5days prior to biddate. Arepresentative sample product included with a Substitution Request Form shallbe submitted. ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 D. Manufacturer’s Data: Submit manufacturer’s product data including: 1. Performance 2. Size 3. Type 4. Options provided 5. Fan curves 6. Indicate Compliance withSection 1.1 where applicable. 1.5 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Alllisted clothes dryer boosters shallbe assembled and marked at the facilityindicatedby the listing control number. B. Clothes dryer booster system is able to sense positive and negative pressure in the duct system. C. System capacity scheduled shallbe minimum required. D. Provide fans with AMCA performance certification and label. 1.6 MANUFACTURER WARRANTY A. All equipment is to be guaranteed against defects in materials and/or workmanshipfor aperiod of 24 months from the date of delivery to the construction site. The warranty shallbe provided by the equipment vendor and shallinclude the parts necessary to repair or replace all defective parts and materials. 1.7 INSTALLATION AND OPERATION MANUALS A. Provide to Owner’s Representative complete Installation andOperation manuals withproduct literature on the supplyfan and controls, dimensional and wiring diagrams. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 MANUFACTURER 1. Design Basis: LF Systems 2. Acceptable Manufacturers: a. Greenheck b. Cook 2.2 90° INLINECLOTHESDRYERBOOSTER A. FurnishLFSystems 90° Inline clothes dryer booster(s) withdesign volume anddesign pressure as scheduled on the drawings and specified. The clothes dryer booster shallbe listed to UL STD 705 and shall bear the listed markfrom an OSHA approved NRTL. ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 B. The entire exhaust fan shallbe constructed ofG90Steel. The exhaust fan shallbe constructed of minimum .060 thickness. The exhaust fan shallbe listed to ULSTD705 and shallbear the listed markfrom an OSHA approvedNRTL. The booster shallbe meet (AMCA)99-0401Type B spark resistant construction. The booster shall have integrated access doors for cleaning. Upblast, termination fans with any type ofimpeller guard or screen shall not be permitted. C. The exhaust fan impeller shallbe statically anddynamicallybalanced withpermanently attachedbalancing weights. Balancing weights shallbe of the same material as the impeller. D. The exhaust fan shallbe listedfor 480°F exhaust gas temperatures and shalldischarge flue gasses vertically or horizontally, as scheduled on drawings. E. The exhaust fan motor shallbe electronically commutated totally enclosed and outdoor rated. The motor shallhave aminimum efficiency of75%. Permanent split capacitor motors shall not be approved. F. The exhaust fan motor shallbe induction type totally enclosed andIP55 rated. The motor shall have aminimum efficiency of 75% and shallbe rated for a 10:1 turndown ratio. 2.3 PERFORMANCE, DRAFT CONTROL SYSTEM A. The clothes dryer booster system shallbe able to reach set-point within 15s ofinitialdemand. B. The clothes dryer booster system shallinclude an intelligent feed-back signal to determine the RPM of the motor. C. The clothes dryer booster shall maintain the pressure set-point to within +/-0.01” W.C. 2.4 SEQUENCE OF OPERATION A. Ademand signal or excitation is receivedby the pressure control which activates the sensor checkfunction when available. Once the sensor functionalityhas been verified, the system controls the fan speed to achieve the set point. Once the set-point has been achieved, the system energizes the safety relay of the appliance calling for heat B. As individual appliances callfor heat, the system will adjust the fan speed to maintain the set-point pressure. When all appliances have satisfied, the controller will disengage the clothes dryer booster. 2.5 ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS A. Power supply shallbe: 1. L-series pressure control: 120VAC, single phase, 60Hz 2. EC motors: 120VAC or 240VAC, single phase, 60Hz 3. VFD: 240VAC, single phase, 60Hz, 208VAC or 480VAC, three phase, 60Hz ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  B. All wiring shallbe in accordance with the NationalElectricalCode. 1. L-series pressure controller 2. Clothes dryer booster 3. Supply Fan 4. CGM-503 CO safety control PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 INSTALLATION A. Complete structural, mechanical, and electrical connections in accordance with manufacturers’ printedinstructions. B. Installing contractor shallinstall all clothes dryer booster components as indicated on drawings, for EC models, the fan shall be powered locally, for three phase models, the fan motor shallbe powered through the VFD. Low voltage wiring shallbe at least 18gauge shielded wire. C. Install units level andplumb. D. Provide necessary auxiliary supporting steel. E. Mount motor anddrives so belts run true. F. Provide necessary lubrication. G. Provide flexible duct connections on inlet anddischarge. H. Provide 460v/120v transfer to serve controls and convenience outlet at all460v fans. I. Provide unfuseddisconnect of suitable capacity. Disconnect shallbe weatherproof where installed outside or in a location subject to wetness 3.2 OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS A. Instruct Owner’s Representative anddesignatedpersonnelin the proper operation and maintenance of the packaged system. 3.3 NOISE AND VIBRATION A. Insure that fans are properly supported on vibration isolators. Reference Section 230548for Vibration Isolation Requirements. B. Insure that flexible duct connections are properly made. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  C. Checkfan for improper balance andhave fan re-balancedif necessary. D. Check for proper rotation. E. Checkfor unusual noise or vibration and correct as necessary. 3.4 ACCESS A. Provide for proper access to allparts offan needinginspection or service with access doors in fan or ductwork. END OF SECTION 23 0523 ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  SECTION 23 36 00 -AIRTERMINAL UNITS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SECTION INCLUDES A. Variable and constant volume terminal units. B. Variable volume regulators. C. Integralheating coils. D. Integraldamper motor operators. E. Integral controls. F. Dualduct air mixingboxes. 1.2 PRODUCTS FURNISHED BUT NOT INSTALLED UNDER THIS SECTION A. Section 230900 –BuildingAutomation andAutomatic Temperature ControlSystems: Thermostats and control components. 1.3 REFERENCES A. NFPA90A -Installation ofAir Conditioning andVentilation Systems. B. UL181 -Factory-Made Air Ducts andConnectors. C. ARI880 -Air Conditioning andRefrigeration Institute StandardRatingConditions for Air Terminals. D. UL -Shutoff terminal must be ULlisted as aRoom Air Terminal. E. ASTMA527(SteelSheet, Zinc CoatedGalvanized) 1.4 SUBMITTALS A. Submit shopdrawings andproduct data sheets indicating configuration, general assembly, and materials usedin fabrication. B. Submit product data indicating configuration, general assembly, and materials usedin fabrication. Include catalogperformance ratings whichindicate air flow, static pressure, and radiated sound power levels (2nd through 7th octave bands) at design maximum operating conditions. Also submit RadiatedSoundNC values. ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 Shall be calculated at design conditions with the following path attenuation credits: CORRECTION TO OCTAVE BAND SOUND POWER VALUE 2 3 4 5 6  7  Env Adj -3 -2 -1 -1.-1 Mineral Fiber Ceiling Tile -9 -10 -12 -14 -15 Space Effect Factor -10 -11 -12 -13 -13  -1 -15 -14  This transfer function represents modeling assumptions based on ARI885-90. C. Submit manufacturer’s installation instructions. 1.5 QUALIFICATIONS A. Manufacturer: Company specializingin manufacturing the products specifiedin this section with minimum ten years experience. 1.6 WARRANTY A. Provide one year manufacturer’s parts warranty. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 SINGLEDUCTCONSTANT(C.A.V.)ANDVARIABLE(V.A.V.)VOLUMEAIR TERMINAL UNITS A. Manufacturers: 1. Design Basis: Titus 2. Other Acceptable Manufacturers: a. Anemostat b. Metal Aire c. Enviro-Tec d. Carnes B. Sound Criteria: 1. Conform to ARI880performance test standard. a. Soundlevels maybe attained using attenuators, but pressure drop of attenuator must be included as part of unit pressure drop. b. Units maydischarge into lined or fiberglass ductwork, credit for which cannot be claimed in sound criteria. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  C. Duct Connections: 1. Duct connections shown on drawing are minimum. 2. Units withlarger connections maybe used to meet pressure or sound requirements. 3. Flexible duct shallbe same size as unit connection. D. Construction: 1. The terminal casing shallbe minimum 22-gauge galvanized steel, internallylined with dual density1 inch thick insulation which complies with UL 181 and NFPA 90A. All exposed insulation edges shallbe coated with NFPA 90A approved sealant to prevent entrainment of fibers in the airstream. 2. The discharge connection shallbe slip anddrive construction for attachment to metal ductwork. 3. Maximum leakage not exceeding1%design flow. 4. The damper shallbe heavygauge steel with shaft rotatingin Delrin® self-lubricating bearings. Nylon bearings are not acceptable. Shaft shall be clearly marked on the end to indicate damper position. Stickers or other removable markings are not acceptable. The damper shallincorporate amechanical stop to prevent over-stroking and asynthetic seal to limit close-off leakage to the maximum values. 5. Actuators shallbe capable of supplying at least 35-inchlbs. of torque to the damper shaft and shall be mounted externally for service access. Terminals withinternal actuator mounting or linkage connection must include gasketed access panel, removable without disturbing ductwork. E. At an inlet velocity of2000fpm, the minimum static pressure required to operate any terminal size shall not exceed 0.13-inch wg for the basic terminal. F. Heating Coils: 1. Proof offlow shallbe by sail switch. 2. Electric HeatingCoils (SCR) a. Electric coils shallbe supplied andinstalled on the terminalby the terminal manufacturer. b. Coils shallbe ETLlisted. c. Proportional, modulating electric coils shallbe supplied andinstalled on the terminal by the terminal manufacturer. Coils shall be ETL listed. Coils shall be housedin an attenuator section integral with the terminal with element grid recessed from unit discharge a minimum of 5inches to prevent damage to elements during shipping and installation. Elements shallbe 80/20 nickel chrome, supportedby ceramic isolators amaximum of3.5 inches apart, staggeredfor maximum thermal transfer and element life, andbalanced to ensure equal output per step. d. The integral controlpanel shallbe housedin aNEMA1 enclosure withhinged access door for access to all controls and safety devices ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 e. Electric coils shall contain aprimary automatic reset thermal cutout, asecondary manual reset thermal cutout, proportional electronic airflow sensor for proof of flow, and line terminal block. f. The proportional electronic airflow sensor shallbe totallyindependent of the duct static pressure and shall adjust the heater capacity according to the available airflow. The heaters shalldeliver maximum heating when needed with normal minimum airflow, reduce heating withlower than minimum airflow and stop heating with no airflow. Unit shallinclude an integral door interlock type disconnect switch which will not allow the access door to be opened while power is on. Non-interlocking type disconnects are not acceptable. g. Allindividual components shallbe ULlisted or recognized. h. Heaters shallbe equipped with aproportionalSCR controller to modulate the heater load according to the temperature control signal. The electronic controller shall be compatible with the followinginput signals: 1) Variable voltage signal0-10VDC 2) Pulse width modulation AC or DC G. Control: 1. Electronic, using velocity sensor, with compensation or correction for distortedflow at inlet. 2. Maximum and minimum volume controls shallbe: a. Factory set (with allowance for altitude ofproject). b. accurate within 10%. 3. Units shallbe normally open with reversing relayfor use withdirect acting thermostat. 4. Provide electric motor. Coordinate voltage with controls contractor, if120V, provide integral disconnect switch in VAV box controller and transformer. 5. Coordinate spring range withAutomatic Temperature ControlSection. 6. Coordinate controls on CAV andVAV units with control contractor. 7. Provide CFM output to BMS. SOUND PERFORMANCE A. Terminal units shall not exceed the following sound criteria. Permitted Radiated Sound Performance  Flow  Air Pressure Drop  .5”  1.0”  1.5”  2”  100  11  15  17  18  200  15  21  23  25  300  22  28  25  28  400  21  27  30  33  500  22  24  27  29  600  23  27  27  29  700  22  25  29  31  800  19  23  26  29  1000  22  28  31  34  ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  1400  22  28  28  30  1800  25  27  29  33  Permitted Discharge Sound Performance  Flow  Air Pressure Drop  .5”  1.0”  1.5”  2”  100  28  29  30  31  200  29  31  34  35  300  29  33  30  33  400  25  30  34  35  500  25  29  31  34  600  26  30  34  36  700  29  33  35  38  800  25  29  30  31  1000  29  31  33  34  1400  26  30  26  29  1800  29  25  28  30  FAN POWERED VAV BOX A. Manufacturers: 1. Design Basis: Titus 2. Other Acceptable Manufacturers: a. Anemostat b. Enviro-Tec c. Carnes d. Metal Aire B. Construction: 1. Galvanized steel, leakage less than 1% nominalCFM. 2. Filter rack on plenum inlet. 3. Backdraft damper on fan discharge. 4. Internallyinsulated with minimum .”, 1.” PCFliningper NFPA-90 andUL-181. C. Fan: 1. Forward curved, direct drive. 2. PSC motor, permanentlylubricated. 3. 3 speed selector switch. 4. P/E switchfor fan on/off. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  D. Coil: 1. Factory mounted electric heating coil withflow confirmation by sail switch. E. Control: 1. Pressure independent using velocity sensor, with compensation or correction for distorted flow at inlet. 2. Maximum and minimum volume controls shallbe: a. Factory set (with allowance for altitude ofproject). b. Accurate within 10%. 3. Units shallbe normally open with reversing relayfor use withdirect acting thermostat. 4. Provide electricaldamper motor. 5. Coordinate spring range with automatic temperature controls. 2.4 ZONE REGISTER TERMINAL A. Furnish andinstall modelZRT zone control terminals byAmerican ALDESVentilation Corporation or approved equal. The exhaust terminals shallbe of sizes and capacities, and at locations scheduled on the drawings. The terminal casing shallbe minimum 24-gauge G90 galvanized steel withintegral duct collar that allows attachment of both rigid andflexible ducting. The collar shallbe sized to allow fullinsertion of amodelCAR-II constant airflow regulator for maximum flow control, but without the regulator extendinginto attachingduct. All 120V terminals must be listedper UL standards and carry the UL or ETL mark indicating compliance. EachZRT terminal shallinclude all necessary mountingbrackets andhardware. B. The primary air volume mechanisms shallbe asingle-blade damper operatedby along-life 24VAC or 120VAC disconnecting type drive motor with normally closed spring-return closure. When fully open, the damper shall rotate out of the air stream on asolid through-blade shaft and pivot on permanentlylubricatedbearings. Apermanentlyfixedperimeter gasket seal shallbe provided to prevent air noise andleakage at the closedposition. The entire damper assembly and all operable parts shallbe capable ofbeing removed from the terminal housingfrom below without disconnecting duct or removing the housing. C. Aminimum airflow modulating controldevice shallbe incorporatedinto the damper assembly. The control device shall respond to changes in duct pressure to maintain specifiedflow rates at aconstant level. The minimum airflow controldevice shallbe calibrated at the factory. Mechanicaldamper stops are not acceptable. Where amaximum flow is indicated on the drawings and/or schedule, amodel CAR-II constant airflow regulator shall be installed in the terminal’s duct collar. VAV terminal units with analog electronic or direct digital controls and suitable maybe used as an alternative. Installation shallbe per all applicable codes and manufacturer’s instructions. 2.5 GENERAL EXHAUST VAV BOX A. The Airflow ControlValve shallbe amultichamber AccuValve or approved equal. Equivalent Phoenix valves with sound attenuators willbe considered as a substitution. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  B. The Airflow ControlValve shall consist of acompression section, two airflow control surfaces, factory-mounted digital VorTek airflow measuring device and factory-mounted high speed actuator. C. The compression section shalldivide the airstream into at least two separate airstreams. Each airstream shall be approximately equalin size and the total open area shall be approximately 50% of the duct open area. The divided sections shall cause compression therefore creating a more laminar flow for better airflow measurement and turndown. The compression section shall be of an aerodynamic shape with a static regain section to insure minimalpressure drop. The valve shall not require any duct straight runs either upstream or downstream of the airflow valve to achieve required performance. D. Airflow control valves shallbe alinear type and shall operate with aminimum turndown ratio of at least 8to 1. E. The airflow control valve shall respond within one second of achange in duct static pressure when provided with factory controls. F. Accuracy of the airflow valve shallbe 5% of readingin the 8to 1range of the damper. G. Airflow control valves shallbe field selectable fail-safe to either the open or closedposition depending on the application. For airflow valves withlinkage, springs, levers or bearings in the airstream access doors must be provided upstream anddownstream of each and every damper for inspection of those devices for maintenance purposes. H. All critical components of the airflow control valve shallbe easily accessible from one side of the valve. All linkages shallbe out of the airstream to avoid possible corrosion andloss of accuracy. I. Airflow control valves shallbe of alow pressure dropdesign for energy efficiency. Valves shall not require greater than 0.3” pressure drop at maximum airflow. Airflow control valves that require higher pressures to operate shall not be acceptable. If valves requiringgreater than these pressures are submitted the providing contractor shall be responsible for providing reimbursement to the customer of $3,000.00 per 1,000 cfm of exhaust of the system for the additionalbreakhorsepower requirements of the additional static pressure system requirement and shall be shown as a separate line item on the technical proposal / quotation J. Valve shallbe capable ofbeing usedin ademandbased static pressure reset control scheme. This scheme requires each valve to communicate the valve position as 0-100% open/closed via communications to the BMS where the reset control scheme is set up. Venturi valves shall not be acceptable for static pressure reset control because their valve position is not indicative of the static pressure in the duct. K. The airflow valve shallbe complete with adigital vortex type airflow sensingdevice providing true airflow feedbackfor the system. Airflow valves using mechanical means for creating pressure independence will not be acceptable. If an airflow valve such as a venturi valve is submitted that uses mechanical means for creatingpressure independence such as springs and plungers, the valve manufacturer shall provide a 5 year service contract to the owner at no additional charge. The contract shall provide recalibration of the mechanical device using NIST traceable air stations andinstrumentation having acombined accuracy of at least +1% of signal over the entire range of measurement. These mechanicaldevices shall be further calibrated and their accuracy verified to +5% of signal at aminimum of eight different airflows across the full operation flow and static pressure range of the device. Service is provided twice annually for 5years with complete service reports provided to the owner. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  L. Airflow measuringdevices shallbe of the Vortex Shedding type, capable of continuously monitoring the airflow volume of the duct served and electronically transmitting asignallinear to the airflow volume. A VorTek airflow sensor shallbe provided in each chamber of the airflow control valve. Airflow measuringdevices shallbe capable of measuring velocity over the full range of400 to 5000FPM. Pitot or ThermalAirflow sensors shall not be acceptable. M. Individual airflow sensors shallbe of rugged construction, and shall not require special handling duringinstallation. Sensors shall be mounted on support bars. Standard materials shall be manufactured of corrosion resistant CPVC and ABS. N. Individual velocity sensors shall not be affectedbydust, temperature, pressure, or humidity. The sensors shall be passive in nature, with no active parts within the air stream. The output from individual sensors shall be linear with respect to airflow velocity and shallbe capable of sensing airflow in one direction only. The velocity sensors shall not require calibration. O. Velocity sensing methods other than those specified shall not be acceptable. For another velocity sensing method to be consideredit must provide the basic requirements for linear electronic output, turndown, accuracy, materials of construction, and output signal. If differential pressure devices are to be considered, dualdifferential pressure transmitters, the span of the lower transmitter being one tenth the span of the higher, with an accuracy not less than +/-0.5%, shall be utilized to provide the required turndown. Orifice type devices shall have a Beta ratio of 0.7 or less, and shall be installed in accordance with ASMEguidelines for up and downstream conditions. P. The airflow sensors shallbe easily accessible in the valve for inspection. Q. Use of valve or damper position for calculation of airflow volume is not acceptable. Direct airflow measurements must be taken. R. Sensing methods employing thermaldevices in the airstream shall not be acceptable due to their susceptibility to dust and dirt buildupin and exhaust airstream which could cause serious errors in readings and resultant safetyissues in the laboratory. S. Airflow ControlValve shallhave factoryinstalled electric actuator which shall operate on 24VAC. Acutator shall accept either a 4-20maDC or 2-10VDC signal and shall modulate the valve over the range ofCFM. The actuator shall modulate the valve between 0to full scale CFMin under 2 seconds. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  T. Warranty shall commence upon the date ofbeneficial use and extendfor aperiod of twenty-four months whereupon any defects in materials shallbe repaired by the supplier at no cost to the owner. PART 3 -EXECUTION INSTALLATION A. Installin accordance with manufacturer’s instructions. END OF SECTION 23 3600 ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  SECTION 23 73 14 – WET AREA DEHUMIDIFICATION UNITS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 WORK INCLUDED A. Furnish andinstall, where indicated, afactory-assembled, fully-enclosed, split environmental control system designedfor natatorium environment control. Features shallinclude: 1. Dehumidification by means of adirect expansion evaporator coil. 2. Space heatingby means of apackaged electric resistance heating coil. 3. Cooling mode withheat rejection to afluidloopby means of abrazedplate heat exchanger. Fluid to be cooled via externalfluid cooler (aka Dry Cooler, Chilled Water Loop, or Fluid loop: EWT40°F -115 °F). No site refrigeration work shallbe required. 4. Integral minimum outdoor air connection. 5. Internet connectivityfor 2years via cellbased technology. 1.2 QUALITY AND SAFETY ASSURANCE A. The system shallbe ETLlisted. B. The system shallbe completely assembled, wired, piped, and test-run at the factoryprior to shipping. All controls shallbe factory adjusted to satisfy the design conditions. C. Manufacturer shallhave aminimum of ten-plus years prior experience making similar equipment as described in this specification. D. Wherever possible, the system shallhave amechanical vestibule where the electricalpanel, compressor(s), pool water heat exchanger(s), receiver(s) and most of the refrigeration controls are out of the process air stream E. When connected to anetwork withInternet access, the system shallhave remote service capability with the ability for field service technicians to receive service and trouble alerts by e.mail and make parameter adjustments via a browser interface on any Internet-capable device 1.3 RELATED WORK A. Section 230513 –Motors andStarters B. Section 230530 –Electronic SpeedControllers C. Section 238216 –Air Coils D. Section 234000 –Air Cleaning E. Section 230900 –BuildingAutomation andAutomatic Temperature ControlSystems ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 1.4 REFERENCES A. ARI430 -Standardfor CentralStation Air HandlingUnits. B. NFPA90A -Installation ofAir Conditioning andVentilation Systems. C. ANSI/AFBMA9 -LoadRatings andFatigue Life for BallBearings. D. SMACNA -HVACDuct Construction Standards. E. ARI410 -Standardfor ForcedCirculation Air-Cooling andAir-HeatingCoils. F. ANSI/UL900 -Test Performance ofAir Filter Units. G. AMCA301 -Methodfor PublishingSoundRatings for Air MovingDevices. H. ASHRAE90.1 -EnergyEfficiency. 1.5 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Natatorium Air Handling Unit: Product of manufacturer regularly engaged in production of components who issues complete catalog data on totalproduct offering. B. Natatorium Air HandlingUnit: Certify capacity, static pressure, fan speed, brake horsepower and selection procedures in accordance with ARI430-89. C. Air Coils: Certify capacities, pressure drops and selection procedures in accordance withARI 410-87. 1.6 SUBMITTALS A. Submit as-built drawings andproduct data under provisions ofDivision 1. B. As-built drawings shall show unit configuration in direction of airflow and shallindicate assembly and unit dimensions. C. Product data shallindicate dimensions, weights, capacities, fan performance, motor electrical characteristics, and finishes of materials. D. Submit product data offilter sizes andquantities, filter performance, andfilter frames. E. Submit manufacturer’s installation instructions under provisions ofDivision 1. F. Provide fan curves with specified operatingpoint clearlyplotted. ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 G. Submit soundpower levels for air handling unit(s) at scheduled conditions. If unit exceeds sound power levels at scheduled conditions, manufacturer must provide sound attenuators. 1.7 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE DATA A. Submit operation and maintenance data under provisions ofDivision 1. B. Include instructions for lubrication, filter replacement, motor anddrive replacement, spare parts lists, and wiring diagrams. 1.8 DELIVERY, STORAGE, ANDHANDLING A. Do not operate units for anypurpose, temporary or permanent, untilductworkis clean, filters are in place, bearings lubricated, andfan has been test run under observation. B. Unit shallbe shipped to the jobsite broken down into pieces that rigged through existing building openings and assembled in place by/under the supervision offactory personnel. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 GENERAL The natatorium control system shallinclude: A. Mechanicalprocess dehumidification B. Indoor cabinet configuration C. Split system with remote outdoor air-cooledfluid cooler (DryCooler, ChilledWater Loop, Fluid Loop : EWT 40°F -110°F) for AC heat rejection D. Apackaged electric resistance heating coil, sized as specifiedby the design engineer to meet the skin losses and outdoor air heating loads E. Air filtration via MERV-13pleatedpanelfilters for return F. Minimum outdoor air connection G. Aservice vestibule where the compressor, refrigeration specialties, control valves and all electronics are outside of process air stream H. Active monitoring and control of supply air volume. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  SEQUENCE OF OPERATION The system shall be designed and sized to maintain the specified space conditions A. System Startup 1. Power is turned on or the system is restarted 2. After ashort initialdelay to allow the sensors to stabilize, the blower starts and operates continuously 3. Based on sensor feedback, the system shallbegin or resume operation based on the sequence below B. Airside Configuration 1. The system continuouslydelivers the specified supply air volume to the natatorium 2. The minimum exhaust air volume is set to meet the engineer's schedule. 3. The minimum outdoor air volume is set to meet the engineer's schedule. C. Dehumidification Mode 1. The return air relative humidityis above the humidity setpoint 2. Return air dewpoint is above dewpoint setpoint. 3. The compressor enters the Compressor Start sequence 4. If the system cannot maintain the relative humiditybelow setpoint, the compressor second stage will start, then the second circuit first stage andfinally the second circuit second stage. 5. Compressors switch to low stage once the return air relative humidity setpoint is met or return air dewpoint drops below 45F. D. Air ConditioningMode 1. The return air temperature is above the room temperature setpoint 2. The compressor starts, if not already operating in Dehumidification Mode 3. Excess compressor hot gas is diverted to afluid-cooledbrazedplate heat exchanger. Up to 100% of compressor heat is rejectedinto the glycolfluid loop whichis pumped outdoors to an externalfluid cooler (either aDry Cooler, ChilledWater Loop, or Fluid Loop Cooling Tower loop, or Fluidloop: EWT40°F -115°F) for 100% heat rejection at summer design ambient conditions 4. If the system cannot maintain the return air temperature setpoint, the compressor second stage will start, then the second circuit first stage andfinally the second circuit second stage. 5. Compressors switch to low stage once the return air temperature setpoint is met or return air dewpoint drops below 45F. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  E. Space HeatingMode 1. The return air temperature is below the room temperature setpoint 2. The microprocessor space heating output signal(0-10 volts)is sent to the heating coil controller. The signal output will regulate based on the return air temperature F. Freeze Protection 1. The supply air temperature falls below the freezestat setpoint 2. Exhaust fan(s) are stopped and outdoor air damper(s) are fully closed 3. When the freezestat alarm is tripped, it must be manually clearedby the operator 2.3 CABINET A. Cabinet Construction: All cabinet 16, 20 and24gauge sheet metal shallbe galvanizedG90 steel or GalvalumeTM alloy with mill-applied zinc phosphate primer followed by an exterior grade white silicone modified polyester top coat. The sheet metal is engineered to form a cabinet with maximum strength and rigidity. All seams shall be caulked with silicone to prevent air and water leakage or infiltration. 1. The cabinet walls shallbe of single-wall construction using20gauge pre-painted steel with 1inch offiberglass insulation protectedby an anti-microbial top coat 2. The cabinet roof shallbe engineered with structuralbendingfor maximum rigidity with 20-gauge steel and shall be mechanicallyfastened to the walls of the unit 3. The cabinets shallbe mechanically assembled with stainless steel5/32" sealedblind rivets. Where bolts are requiredbright zinc plated bolts shall be used 4. Access doors shallbe removable, secured to cabinet usingheavy-duty stainless steelhex.head bolts with stainless steel washers insulated with rubber gaskets B. Outdoor Air Intake: 1. Minimum Outdoor Air connection: motorizeddamper, filter and time clock C. Insulation: The unit shallbe insulatedper the following standards: 1. One inch thick, surface coated with an anti-microbiallayer, protected against perforation and fiber air entrainment with areinforcing mesh 2. Fire resistant rating to conform to NFPAStandard90A and90B 3. Sound attenuation coefficient shall not be less than 1.00 at afrequency of1,000Hz as per ASTM Standard C423 4. Thermal conductivity shall not exceed0.23Btu/hr-sqft-ft at 75 °F D. Cabinet configuration shallinclude: 1. Afilter rack with separate access doors shallbe providedfor the return air and minimum outdoor air streams ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 2. Unit shallbe equipped withduct collars to admit the minimum outdoor air as scheduled. The outdoor air intake assembly shallhave a built in air filter rack with separate access door, manual air balancingdevice and motorized 2 position extruded aluminum, Insulated, silicone side-sealed damper operated by 24-hour time clock 3. Mechanical vestibule: The unit shallhave the compressor, receiver, solenoid valves and the electrical panel in a separate compartment out of the processed air stream. All components shall be serviceable while the unit is in operation without disturbing the airflow 4. Electricalpanel: The unit shallhave abuilt-in electrical controlpanelin aseparate compartment in order not to disturb the airflow within the dehumidifier during electrical servicing. All electrical components shallbe mounted on a 16 gauge galvanized sub-panel 2.4 FILTERS Wherever possible, air filters shall be standard sized, replaceable, off-the-shelffilters including: A. Return Air: 2-InchMERV13, 90%pleatedfilters with rust-free non-metallic structure on a slide-in or face-loading rack B. Outside Air: 2-InchMERV13, 90%pleatedfilters with rust-free non-metallic structure. C. Dirty air filter switches included on the return air filter for indicating an alarm when pressure drop exceeds aset point. 2.5 COILS A. Evaporator/dehumidifier coils shallbe designedfor maximum moisture removal capacity 1. Coils shallbe fullydipped and coated with apolyester/enamel coatingfor maximum corrosion protection. Coating shall comply withASTM B117/D1654 and ASTMD2126 for corrosion resistance against common acids, salt andgases. 2. Coil shallhave galvanized casing and endplates. 3. Aluminum fin and copper tubes mechanicallybonded to assure highheat transfer. B. Air reheat coils shallbe sizedfor variable heat transfer into the air with acapacity of100% of the compressors total required heat of rejection. Air reheat coils that are on off will cause unstable space conditions and are not acceptable. 1. Coils shallbe fullydipped and coated with apolyester/enamel coatingfor maximum corrosion protection. Coating shall comply withASTM B117/D1654 and ASTMD2126 for corrosion resistance against common acids, salt andgases 2. Coil shallhave galvanized casing and endplates 3. Aluminum fin and copper tube joints mechanicallybonded to assure highheat transfer ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  C. Coils shallhave a3-year warranty extension for atotal of5years coverage 2.6 DRAIN PANS Each evaporator coil shallbe provided with a positive draining, compound-sloped, baked powder paint coated aluminum drain pan withfully-welded corners to ensure zero water retention. In no way will stainless steel or galvanizeddrain pans be acceptable. 2.7 BLOWERS AND BLOWER MOTORS A. Supply Blowers: 1. Each supplyblower shallbe an impeller plenum fan complete withbackward curved, three-dimensional, profiledblades made of ahigh-performance composite material directly driven via adirect current (DC) electronic commuted (EC) motor. The blower and motor shall be completely corrosion resistant andbe maintenance free. The EC-Motor shall be of zero-slippage design with continuously variable speed control when connected to the system's controller. Fans that are not direct drive or EC are not acceptable. 2. EachEC motor shallhave maintenance-free electronic circuitry, arotor withpermanent magnets, and an integral controller to provide the windings with electrical current so that, the motor rotates continuously and quietly. 3. Eachfan shallbe statically anddynamicallybalanced on precision electronic balancers. B. Exhaust Blowers: 1. The remote (by others) exhaust blower (EF1) shallbe sized to maintain the negative pressure requirement in the space during normal operation and interlocked to the system's occupancy scheduler 2.8 DAMPERS Internal dampers shallbe made from extruded anodized aluminum with a parallelblade configuration and neoprene double-seal tips to minimize leakage. Damper blades shall be mounted on steel rods which rotate on nylon bushings. All damper hardware shallbe corrosion resistant A. The system shallbe provided with normally closed outside air and exhaust air dampers equipped with spring-return actuators. The dampers adjust between 0% to 100% open position. B. The outdoor air and exhaust air dampers shallbe of opposedblade configuration. Dampers shall have 0.750-inchinsulatedblades made from extruded anodized aluminum with neoprene double-seal tips to minimize leakage. Damper leakage shall be less than 1% of maximum flow at 4-inch water column differential. Damper blades shall be mounted on steel rods which rotate on nylon bushings. All damper hardware shall be corrosion resistant ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 2.9 COMPRESSORS A. Hermetic, two-stage scroll action compressor, suction gas cooled, suitable for refrigerant R.454B B. The compressor(s) shallbe mounted on rubber-in-shear isolators to limit the transmission of noise and vibration C. The compressor(s) shallbe equipped with removable crankcase heater(s)for liquid migration protection D. The compressor(s) shallbe located outside the conditioned air stream in the system's service vestibule E. Compressors shallhave a3-year warranty extension for atotal of5years coverage F. The compressor manufacturer must have awholesale outlet for replacement parts in the nearest major city 2.10 REFRIGERATION CIRCUIT A. Each refrigeration circuit shallhave pressure transducers monitoring the refrigerant discharge (high) and suction (low)pressures. The refrigeration circuit shall be accessible for diagnostics, adjustment and servicing without the needfor service manifold gauges B. All refrigeration circuits shallhave refrigerant control valves, aliquidline filter-drier, aliquid and moisture indicator, an expansion valve, head pressure controlfeature and pump down feature C. The system shallhave an externally adjustable balancedport design mechanical thermostatic expansion valve. The valve shall have aremovable power head D. Tamper proof, hermetically sealed non-adjustable high andlow pressure switches and refrigeration service valves shall be installed using Schrader type valves. Refrigeration service valves shall be located outside of the airstream E. The suction line shallbe fullyinsulated with0.500-inch closed cellinsulation 2.11 CONTROL PANEL A. The electrical contractor shallbe responsible for externalpower wiring anddisconnect switch fusing. Power block terminals shall be provided ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 B. Main controlpanel shallbe mountedinside the service vestibule outside of the process air stream C. Blower motors shallbe protected against overloads. D. The system shallhave avoltage monitor withphase protection E. Available dry contacts shallinclude: 1. Alarm 2. Blower interlock 3. Stage 1&2heating 4. Outdoor air damper control 5. Remote exhaust fan #1 6. Remote exhaust fan #2 7. Remote cooler 8. System on 9. Heat recovery F. Terminals shallbe provided to senddry contacts to remote coolers. G. All wiring shallbe installedin accordance withUL or CSA safety electrical code regulations and shall be in accordance with the NFPA All components usedin the system shall be UL or CSA listed H. Wiringdiagrams shallbe located near the electricalpanel(s) on the system. These diagrams shall provide colour-coding and wire numbering for easy troubleshooting. All wires shall be contained in a wire duct. I. The compressor(s) shallhave atime delay on start to prevent short cycling J. An airflow switch and adry contact for alarm(s) shallbe provided andfactory-mounted. 2.12 AUXILIARY AIR HEATING The packaged electric heating system shall be sized to meet the scheduledheating capacity and have the following characteristics: A. Modulating(0-10V) air heat control B. The heater frame shallbe made from galvanized steel C. The resistance-heating coils shallbe machine crimped onto galvanized terminals, securedby an anti-rotating high temperature resistant premium grade ceramic socket ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  D. Heating elements shallbe crimped to Monel or stainless-steel terminallugs. Terminallugs and pins shall be positively prevented from corroding by means of non-round bulkhead bushings E. Screens shallbe provided to protect the heating elements F. Heating elements shallbe open-type nickel-chromium resistance wire elements supported on premium ceramic bushings G. Integral andprewired components shallinclude contactors, afused control transformer, power supply terminals, control terminals and athermal cut-out switch(disc type, automatic reset) H. The packagedheater is fully wired at the factory and the system shallhave asingle point power connection 2.13 AIR CONDITIONING (HEAT REJECTION) Air-cooled air conditioning via afluid cooler A. The system shallbe equipped with an air conditioning mode where excess compressor heat is rejected to afluid cooled condensing brazed plate heat exchanger to an external fluid cooler (aka Dry Cooler, Chilled Water Loop, Fluid Loop : EWT 40°F -115 °F) via asingle glycol fluid loop. No site refrigeration work shall be required. The packaged fluid-cooledHeat exchanger and externalfluid cooler shall both be capable of rejecting 100% of the compressor heat rejection with an air on temperature at summer design conditions. B. The system shallbe provided with adry contact to enable 24VAC/2A signal to operate the external fluid cooler remote outdoor fluid cooler control. The system shall also provide a 0-10V signal to modulate fan speed. C. Each refrigeration circuit shallinclude refrigerant valves, areceiver withpressure relief valve set at 650 psig, apressure control valve and a pressure differential valve, and two manual shutoff valves to isolate the outdoor fluid cooler D. Coils shallbe tested at 425 to 700PSIG. Coils shallbe counter flow andhave adequate capacity to dissipate the total heat rejection of the system at design conditions E. The fan(s) shallbe direct driven axialfan(s) made of aluminum in which the motor and controller are integrated. The fan(s) include an EC commutateddirect-current external rotor motor providing maximum efficiency and the quietest performance. The EC motor shallhave maintenance-free electronic circuitry, arotor with permanent magnets and an integral controller to provide the windings with electrical current so that the motor rotates continuously and quietly. The fan has an aerodynamically-optimized, sickle-blade profile, patterned with serrated trailing edge and winglets on the blade outer edge for energy and noise-optimized operation ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  1. The fan assembly shallbe balancedin Class G6.3 acc DINISO1940, dynamic on two levels 2. The fan assembly shallbe suitable for ambient temperatures of -40°C to max. +70°C 3. Thermal contacts installedin the windings compliant withTHCL155 4. Drive motor in external rotor principle, sealedin protection class IP54 with moisture protection impregnation of the windings, topical protection 5. High corrosion resistance design withhighquality and reliability F. The system shallbe provided with aremote modulating valve to control the air conditioning fluid flow going to the unit. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 INSPECTION A. Contractor shall examine location where this equipment is to be installed anddetermine space conditions and notify Architect in writing of conditions detrimental to proper and timely completion of the Work. 3.2 INSTALLATION A. Install equipment where shown, in accordance with manufacturer’s written instructions, and with recognizedindustry practices, to ensure that equipment comply with requirements and serve intended purposes. B. Perform athoroughphysicalinspection of the system upon deliveryfrom the shipment carrier C. Identify andimmediately report anyphysicaldamage to manufacturer D. If the system is to be storedprior to installation, store in aclean, dryplace protectedfrom weather, dirt, fumes, water, construction and physicaldamage E. Handle the system carefullyduringinstallation to prevent damage F. Damaged systems or components shall not be installed. Contact the manufacturer for RMA instructions G. Comply with the manufacturer's rigging andinstallation instructions for unloading the system and moving it into position H. Coordinate with other work as necessary to interface installation of equipment with other components of systems. I. Check alignment and, where necessary(andpossible), realign shafts of motors and equipment within tolerances recommended by manufacturer. ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 J. Where installingpiping adjacent to the system, allow space for service and maintenance. K. Duct connections: Drawings indicate the general arrangement of the ducts. Connect the system to ducts withflexible duct connectors. Comply with code requirements for flexible duct connectors. L. Electrical connections: Comply with code requirements for power wiring, switches and motor controls in electrical sections. 3.3 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Upon completion ofinstallation of equipment, energized with normalpower source, test equipment to demonstrate compliance with requirement. When possible, field correct malfunctioning units, then retest to demonstrate compliance. Replace units which cannot be satisfactory corrected. 3.4 START-UP A. Detailedinstructions for start up as providedby the manufacturer must be followed. B. Installing contractor must contact the manufacturer prior to start up to confirm start up procedures. C. Remote Internet access and control must be initiated and confirmedby the factoryprior to start up for extended labor warranty to be in effect . 3.5 WARRANTY A. The entire system shallhave a24-monthlimitedparts warrantyfrom the factory shipdate. B. A1-year labor warranty shallbe providedby the manufacturer when the system is connected to the factory via an Internet monitoring system from the date ofinitial commissioning. C. The compressor(s) shallhave a5-year warrantyfrom the factory shipdate. D. The internal airside heat exchanger coils shallhave a5-year warrantyfrom the factory ship date. E. The drive line shallhave a5-year warrantyfrom the factory shipdate. END OF SECTION 23 7314 ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  SECTION 23 74 00 -PACKAGED ROOFTOP HEAT PUMPS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SECTION INCLUDES A. Package roof top unit. B. Heat exchanger. C. Refrigeration components. D. Unit operating controls. E. Roof curb. F. Electrical power connections. G. Operation and maintenance service. 1.2 RELATED SECTIONS A. Section 230513 –Motors andStarters. B. Section 230548 –Vibration Isolation. C. Section 230700 –MechanicalInsulation. D. Section 234000 –Air Cleaning. E. Section 230900 –BuildingAutomation andTemperature ControlSystems. F. Division 26 __ __ –Equipment WiringSystems. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS A. ARI370 -SoundRating ofOutdoor UnitaryEquipment. B. ANSI/NFPA70-1990 -NationalElectric Code. C. ANSIZ21.47 -Gas-FiredCentralFurnaces (except Direct Vent CentralFurnaces). D. ASHRAEStandard#15. E. EPA Clean Air Act. F. ARIStandard210, andbearingARI certification. ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 G. Refer to all other Specification Sections, including, but not limited to, 230513, 230530, and 23 05 48. 1.4 REFERENCES Parentheses are indicators of which unit(s) the codes apply to, gas/electric (g/e), cooling with electric heat (c/e), heat pump (hp), or (all). A. NFPA90A&B -Installation ofAir Conditioning andVentilation Systems an Installation of Warm Air Heating andAir ConditioningSystems. (all) B. ANSI/ASHRAE15 -SafetyCode for MechanicalRefrigeration. (all) C. ARI360 -Commercial andIndustrialUnitaryAir ConditioningEquipment testing and rating standard. (g/e, c/e above 135,000btuh) D. ARI340 -Commercial andIndustrialUnitaryHeat pumpEquipment. (hp above 135,000btuh) E. ANSI/ASHRAE37 -TestingUnitaryAir Conditioning andHeat PumpEquipment. (all) F. ANSI/ASHRAE/IES90A and90.1 -EnergyConservation in New BuildingDesign Standard. G. ANSI/UL465 -CentralCoolingAir Conditioners Standardfor safety requirements. (g/e, c/e) H. ANSI/UL559 -Heat Pumps, Standardfor safety requirements. (hp) I. ARI210/240 -UnitaryAir-ConditioningEquipment andAir-Source Heat PumpEquipment. (all under 135,000btuh) J. ARI270 -SoundRating ofOutdoor UnitaryEquipment. (allbelow 135,000) K. ANSI/NFPA70-1990 -NationalElectric Code. (all) L. ANSIZ21.47 -Gas-FiredCentralFurnaces (except Direct Vent CentralFurnaces). (g/e) 1.5 SUBMITTALS A. Submit drawings indicating components, dimensions, weights andloadings, required clearances, andlocation and size offield connections. B. Submit manufacturer’s installation instructions. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  C. Submit manufacturer’s data, including: 1. Drawings showing overalldimensions of complete assembly, including curbs at specific location on rooffor each unit. 2. Operating weights. 3. Equipment support requirements. 4. Sizes andlocations of connections. 5. Accessories. 6. Auxiliary support requirements. 7. Unit installation shopdrawings. D. Coordinate withInstaller of temperature control work. Prepare wiringdiagram showing connections to unit wiring to accomplish control sequence specifiedin Section 2309 00. 1.6 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE DATA A. Submit three (3) copies of operation and maintenance manuals to the engineer [after shop drawing review stamphas been applied to the product data]. B. Include manufacturer’s descriptive literature, start-up and operatinginstructions, installation instructions, and maintenance procedures. 1.7 DELIVERY, STORAGEANDHANDLING A. Comply with manufacturer’s installation instructions for rigging, unloading, and transporting units. B. Protect units from physicaldamage. Leave factory shipping covers in place untilinstallation. 1.8 WARRANTY A. Provide afullparts warrantyfor one year from start-up or 18 months from shipment, whichever occurs first. B. Include one year service guarantee on the entire refrigeration cycle andits associatedinterlocks. This guarantee shall obligate the installer to service the equipment and attend to alllegitimate service calls and make necessary repairs, alterations, additions, adding refrigerant charges, etc. for aperiod of one year without additional cost to the Owner. Compressors shall carry an additionalfour year parts warranty with the exclusion of replacement labor. Shopdrawings submittedfor approval shall be accompanied by acopy of the purchase agreementbetween the Contractor and an authorized service representative of the manufacturer for check, test and start up andfirst year service. ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 1.9 MAINTENANCE SERVICE A. Furnish complete parts andlabor service and maintenance ofpackaged roof top units for (1) year from Date of Substantial Completion by manufacturers’ authorized service agency. B. Provide preventive maintenance service with atwo monthinterval as maximum time period between calls. Provide 24-hour emergency service on breakdowns and malfunctions. C. Include maintenance items as outlinedin manufacturer’s operating and maintenance data. D. Contractor shall submit copy of service call work order or report andinclude description of work performed. E. Manufacturer shall maintain aparts and service center in the cityfrom which the units are purchased. 1.10 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS A. Units shallbe U.L. listed andlabeled, classifiedin accordance to ANSIZ21.47for gas fired central furnaces, U.L. 465 for central cooling air conditioners, and U.L. 559for Heat Pumps. Canadian units shall be CSA certified. 1.11 EXTRA MATERIALS A. Provide one (1) set ofpleated media filters equivalent to Farr 30-30in 2” filters. B. Furnish one (1) complete set offan motor drive belts. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 ROOFTOPHEATPUMPWITHOUTHEATRECOVERYWHEEL A. The contractor shallfurnish andinstallpackage rooftop unit(s) as shown and scheduled on the contract documents. The unit(s) shallbe installedin accordance with this specification and perform at the specified conditions as scheduled. B. ApprovedManufacturers 1. Basis ofDesign: Daikin Applied 2. Nortek -Governaire 3. Seasons 4 4. Engineered Air 5. Energy Labs ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  C. General Description 1. Each unit shallbe specificallydesignedfor outdoor rooftop application andinclude a weatherproof cabinet. Units shallbe of amodular design withfactoryinstalled access sections available to provide maximum design flexibility. 2. Furnish unit configuration, layout, performance and electrical characteristics as shown on project plans and schedule. 3. The unit shall undergo acomplete factory run test prior to shipment. The factory test shall include final test of allfan assemblies, arefrigeration circuit runtest, a unit control system operations checkout, aunit refrigerant leak test, and afinal unit inspection 4. The complete unit shallbe ETLlisted. 5. Unit shallbe completelyfactory assembled and shippedin one piece. 6. Unit to be shippedfully charged withR32. 7. All units shallhave decals and tags to indicate caution areas and aid unit service. Unit nameplates shallbe fixed to the main controlpaneldoor. Electrical wiringdiagrams shall be attached to the controlpanels. Installation, operating and maintenance bulletins and start-upforms shall be supplied with each unit. 8. Submittals must demonstrate that scheduled unit leaving air temperature (LAT)is met, that fan and motor heat temperature rise (TR)have been considered, and scheduled entering air temperature (EAT) equals mixed air temperature (MAT). Draw-thru cooling -Scheduled EAT equals cooling coil EAT and scheduled unit LAT equals cooling coil LAT plus TR. D. Cabinet 1. Unit construction for all walls, doors, ceiling andfloor shallbe double wall with asolid galvanized steelliner with a thermalbreakintegral to the panel construction that provides a cleanable interior, prevents conductive heat transfer through the panel, and prevents exterior condensation on the panel. 2. Unit construction for all walls, doors, ceiling andfloor shallbe double wall with asolid stainless steelliner with athermalbreakintegral to the panel construction that provides a cleanable interior, prevents conductive heat transfer through the panel and prevents exterior condensation on the panel. 3. Foam Insulation shallprovide aminimum thermal resistance R-value of13.0. 4. Unit construction shallbe designed to operate at total static pressures up to 8.0inches w.g. 5. Provide quality unit construction withperformance testedin accordance withASHRAE Std 111 – cabinet air leakage shall not exceed leak class 6 (CL =6), at +/-6 in. w.c. casing pressure, where maximum cabinet leakage (cfm/100 ?ft?^2 of casing surface area) = CL x P^0.65. ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 6. Provide quality unit construction with air leakage less than 0.5% ofdesign airflow up to 5 in. w.c.. 7. Provide quality unit construction with air leakage less than 1.0% ofdesign airflow up to 8 in. w.c.. 8. Exterior surfaces shallbe constructed ofpaintedgalvanized steel, for aesthetics andlong.term durability. Paint finish willinclude abase primer with ahigh-qualitypolyester resin topcoat. Finished, unabradedpanel surfaces shallbe exposed to an ASTMB117 salt spray environment and exhibit no visible red rust at aminimum of 3,000 hours exposure. Finished, abraded surfaces shall be tested per ASTMD1654, having amean scribe creepage not exceeding 1/16” at 1,000 hours minimum exposure to an ASTM B117 salt spray environment. Measurements of results shallbe quantified usingASTMD1654in conjunction with ASTM D610 and ASTM D714 to evaluate blister and rust ratings 9. Access shallbe provided to filters, dampers, cooling coils, fan sections, compressors and electrical and controls components. 10. Access doors shallbe providedfor each critical maintenance section in order to provide user easy access to components. All access doors shallbe mounted on fulllength stainless steelpiano hinges and shall be securedby linkage and latch system that is operatedby asingle handle. The latch system shall feature astaggered engagement for ease of operation and a safety catch shallprotect the user from injury in case apositive pressure door is opened while the fan is operating. Doors securedby multiple, mechanical fasteners are not acceptable. 11. The unit base frame shallbe constructed of13gauge pre-painted steel to prevent base rail corrosion. 12. The unit base shall overhang the roof curbfor positive water runoff and shallhave a formed recess that seats on the roof curb gasket to provide apositive, weathertight seal. Liftingbrackets shall be provided on the unit base with lifting holes to accept cable or chain hooks. E. Acoustics 1. Equipment sound performance shall meet the scheduled discharge and return sound power 2. Discharge Plenum sections shallbe lined with aperforated acoustic liner to enhance sound attenuation. 3. Discharge andReturn Plenum sections shallbe lined with aperforated acoustic liner to enhance sound attenuation. F. Fans 1. AllSupply, Return andExhaust Fans shallbe configuredin an array with aminimum number fans specified in the schedule for each unit. 2. Redundancy a. Size allfans for N-1per the schedule b. Each supply, exhaust, and return fan motor shallhave an independent integral inverter or a dedicated variable frequency drive per motor for redundancy. 3. AllFans shallbe dynamicallybalanced as an assemblyin planes as per DIN/ISO21940 to balancinggrade G 6.3 or better or provide 2” Springisolation for each fan. 4. Allfans shallbe provided with totally enclosed maintenance-free ballbearings and permanent lubrication. Bearings shallbe selectedfor aminimum life in excess of 350,000 hrs (L50) at selected operatingpoint. 5. Fan airflow measuring a. AllSupplyFans shallinclude afactoryinstalledflow measuring station. Airflow needs to be readable through the unit controller and building automation system. b. AllSupply andExhaust Fans shallinclude afactoryinstalledflow measuring station. Airflow needs to be readable through the unit controller andbuilding automation system. c. AllSupply andReturn Fans shallinclude afactoryinstalledflow measuring station. Airflow needs to be readable through the unit controller and building automation system. 6. ECM Supply Fans a. Allfans shallbe asingle width, single inlet (SWSI) airfoil centrifugalfan. The fan wheel shall be Class II construction with aluminum fan blades that are continuously welded to the hub plate and end rim. The fan shall be a direct drive fan mounted to the motor shaft. Belts and sheaves are not acceptable due to the additional maintenance. b. The fan motor shallbe atotally enclosed electrically commutated motor that is speed controlledby the rooftop unit controller. The motor shallinclude thermal overloadprotection andprotect the motor in the case of excessive motor temperatures. The motor shallhave phase failure protection andprevent the motor from operation in the event of aloss ofphase. Motors shallbe premium efficiency. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  G. Electrical 1. Unit wiring shall comply withNEC requirements and with all applicable UL standards. All electrical components shallbe UL recognized where applicable. All wiring and electrical components provided with unit shall be number and color coded andlabeled according to the electrical diagram provided for easyidentification. 2. The unit shallbe provided with afactory wired weatherproof controlpanel. Unit shall have apower terminalblockfor main power connection. Aterminalboard shallbe providedfor low voltage control wiring. Branch circuit short circuit protection, 115 volt ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 control circuit transformer and fuse, system switches, and a high temperature sensor. Each compressor and condenser fan motor shall be furnished with contactors andinherent thermal overloadprotection. Supply and return fan motors shallhave contactors and external overloadprotection. Knockouts shallbe providedin the of the main control panels for field wiring entrance. 3. All115-600 volt internal and external wiringbetween controlboxes and components shall be protectedfrom damage by dedicated electrical raceways. 4. The receptacle shallbe poweredby afield supplied115V source. 5. Single non-fuseddisconnect switch shallbe providedfor connecting electricalpower at the unit. Disconnect switches shallbe mountedinternal to the controlpanel and operated by an externally mounted handle. 6. Unit SCCRRating to be 10kAIC minimum. 7. Unit shallbe provided withphase, voltage andbrown out protection which shuts down all motors in the unit if the electrical phases are more than 10% out of balance on voltage or on phase reversal. 8. Unit shallbe provided with asafety shutdown terminalfor installation offield emergency input. 9. All electrical options shallhave a+/-10percent voltage utilization range to protect against voltage variation. H. Safety options 1. Unit shallbe provided with asafety shutdown terminalfor installation offield emergency input I. Cooling Coil 1. The cooling coil section shallbe installedin aadraw through configuration, upstream of the supply air fan. The coil section shallbe complete withfactorypiped cooling coil and sloped drain pan. 2. Direct expansion (DX) cooling coils shallbe fabricated of seamless 1/2" diameter high efficiency copper tubing that is mechanically expanded into high efficiency aluminum plate fins. Coils shall be amulti-row, staggered tube design with aminimum of 4 rows. All units shall have two independent refrigerant circuits and shall use an interlaced coil circuiting that keeps the full coil face active at all load conditions. 3. Each refrigeration circuit shallbe equipped with athermostatic expansion valve for control refrigerant flow control. 4. The refrigerant suction lines shallbe fullyinsulatedfrom the expansion valves to the compressors ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 5. The distributor tubes shallbe sleeved or coated to provide longevity andprotection from leaks. 6. All coils shallbe factoryleak tested withhighpressure air under water. 7. The drain pan shallbe stainless steel anddesigned to comply withASHRAE-62.1double sloped requirements drain pan shallbe provided with the cooling coil. The drain pan shall extend beyond the leaving side of the coil and underneath the cooling coil connections. The drain pan shall have aminimum slope of 1/8" per foot to provide positive draining. The drain pan shall be connected to a threadeddrain connection extending through the unit base. Units with stacked cooling coils shallbe provided with asecondarydrain pan piped to the primary drain pan. 8. Insulation under the drain pan shouldbe aclosed cell structure to prevent moisture from wicking under the drain pan. Fiberglass is not allowed. J. Heat Pump Heating 1. The evaporator coil, condenser coil, compressors and refrigerant circuit shallbe designed for heat pump operation. The refrigerant circuit shall contain a4-way reversing valve for the heat pump operation. The outdoor coil shallhave an electronic expansion valve to control the refrigerant flow. The unit controller shall modulate the expansion valve to maintain compressor operation within the compressor operational envelope. 2. The refrigerant system shall have a pump-down cycle. 3. The unit shallhave an electric resistance heating coilfor auxiliaryheating. When the heatpump operation cannot maintain the discharge air temperature setpoint the electric heating coil shall temper the airstream to the discharge air temperature setpoint. K. ModulatingHot Gas AndLiquidReheat 1. Hot Gas Reheat: Unit shallbe equipped with afully modulatinghot gas reheat coil with hot gas coming from the unit condenser a. Hot gas reheat coil shallbe aMicrochanneldesign. The aluminum tube shallbe a micro channeldesign withhigh efficiency aluminum fins. Fins shallbe brazed to the tubingfor adirect bond. The capacity of the reheat coil shall allow for a20°F temperature rise at all operating conditions. b. The modulatinghot gas reheat systems shall allow for independent control of the cooling coil leaving air temperature and the reheat coilleaving air temperature. The cooling coil and reheat coil leaving air temperature set points shallbe adjustable through the unit controller. During the dehumidification cycle the unit shallbe capable of100% of the cooling capacity. The hot gas reheat coil shall provide discharge temperature control within +/-2°F. c. Each coil shallbe factoryleak tested withhigh-pressure air under water. ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 2. Dehumidification operation withHot gas reheat shall use direct air temperature feedback from the leavingface of the evaporator coil for controlling the compressor cooling capacity and the reheat willbe fully modulate to maintain the leaving/supply air temperature set point. The leaving/supply air temperature set point can be reset based on outside, space, and return temperature or humidity. L. Electric Heat 1. The rooftop unit shallinclude an electrical resistance heating coil section. Heating coils shall be constructed of alow watt density, nickel -chromium alloy resistance wire with intermediate supports that include ceramic bushings. The electrical contractors shallbe of the fullline-breaking type with all the electrical power legs being disconnected when the contactors are not energized. All electrical circuit wiring shallbe designed with copper conductors, aluminum wires are not acceptable. Heating element branch circuits shallbe individuallyfused to amaximum of48Amps per NEC requirements. The power supply for the electric heater shallbe factory wired into the unit's main power block or disconnect switch. 2. The heating modules shallhave an automatic reset, high temperature limit safety protection. Asecondaryhighlimit protection shall also be provided that requires a manual reset. An airflow switch shallbe provided with the heating module to prevent the electric heater from operating in the event of no airflow. 3. The electric heat elements shallbe controlledby the factoryinstalledDDC unit control system. The heater shallhave proportionalSCR control. The unit controller shall modulate the electric heater to maintain the discharge air temperature set point. 4. Electric heat output shalllimit heating output during compressor operation to 0%for purpose of maintaining reduced unit electrical operating requirements. Complete capacity ofinstalled electric heater shallbecome available during periods that compressor is not operating. M. Draw Through Filters 1. All units shallbe provided with cloggedfilter switches and alarm enunciation 2. Unit shallbe provided with adraw-throughfilter section. N. Outdoor/Return Air Section 1. Unit shallbe provided with aMetalMeshpre-filter in the outdoor air hood/section to prefilter large particulate to prevent earlyfilter clogging. 2. Unit shallbe provided with an outdoor air economizer section. The economizer section shall include outdoor, return, and exhaust air dampers. The economizer operation shall be fully integral to the mechanical cooling and allow up to 100% of mechanical cooling if ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  needed to maintain the coolingdischarge air temperature. The outdoor air hood shallbe factoryinstalled and constructedfrom galvanized steelfinished with the same durable paint finish as the main unit. The hood shallinclude moisture eliminator filters to drain water awayfrom the entering air stream. The outside and return air dampers shallbe sized to handle 100% of the supply air volume. The dampers shall be parallel blade design. Damper blades shallbe gasketed with side seals to provide an air leakage rate of 1.5 cfm / square foot of damper area at 1” differentialpressure in according with testing definedin AMCA500. Control of the dampers shallbe by afactoryinstalleddirect coupled actuator. 3. Damper actuator shallbe fully modulating and spring return type. Acomparative drybulb control shallbe provided to sense and compare drybulbin both the outdoor and return air streams to determine if outdoor air is suitable for “free” cooling. If outdoor air is suitable for “free” cooling, the outdoor air dampers shall modulate in response to the unit’s temperature control system. 4. Abarometric exhaust damper shallbe provided to exhaust air out of the unit. Abird screen shall be provided to prevent infiltration of rain and foreign materials. O. Condensing Section 1. AllUnits shallprovide the EnergyEfficiency specifiedEER andIEERper the schedule equipment or higher. 2. Condenser fans shallbe direct drive, axial type designedfor low tip speed and vertical air discharge. Fan blades shallbe constructed of steel and riveted to a steel center hub. Condenser fan motors shallbe heavy-duty, inherentlyprotected, three-phase, non-reversing type withpermanently lubricatedball bearing and integral rain shield. 3. Condenser coils shallbe an all aluminum design, and mounted on polymer brackets, to minimize di-electric corrosion. The aluminum tube shallbe amicro channeldesign with high efficiency aluminum fins. Fins shallbe brazed to the tubingfor adirect bond. Each condenser coil shall be factory leak tested with high-pressure air under water. 4. HeadPressure Control -Each unit shallhave avariable speed scroll compressor on both refrigeration circuit. Each compressor shallbe complete withgauge ports, crankcase heater, sight-glass, anti-slug protection, motor overload protection and a time delay to prevent short cycling and simultaneous starting of compressors following a power failure. Compressors shall be isolated with resilient rubber isolators to decrease noise transmission. 5. Each unit shallhave two independent refrigeration circuits for redundancy. Each circuit shall be complete with alow pressure control, filter-drier, liquid moisture indicator/sight.glass, thermal expansion valve, and amanual reset high pressure safety switch. The thermal expansion valve shallbe capable of modulation from 100% to 25% of its rated capacity. Sight-glasses shall be accessible for viewing without disrupting unit operation. Each circuit shall be dehydrated andfactory charged with Refrigerant 410A and oil. 6. Each unit shallhave at least 4compressor stages of cooling capacity controlfor better part load control as required by ASHRAE 90.1-2013. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  P. Controls 1. Each unit shallbe equipped with acomplete MicroTech® microprocessor based control system. The unit control system shall include all required temperature and pressure sensors, input/output boards, main microprocessor and operator interface. Allboards shallbe individually replaceable for ease of service. All microprocessors, boards, and sensors shall be factory mounted, wired and tested. 2. The microprocessor shallbe astand-alone DDC controller not dependent on communications with any on-site or remote PC or master control panel. The microprocessor shall maintain existing set points and operate standalone if the unit loses either direct connect or network communications. The microprocessor memory shallbe protectedfrom voltage fluctuations as well as any extendedpower failures. Allfactory and user set schedules and controlpoints shallbe maintainedin nonvolatile memory. No settings shall be lost, even during extended power shutdowns. 3. The main microprocessor shall support an RS-232direct connection to aproduct service tool or amodem. A communications module shallbe providedfor direct communication into the BAS network. 4. Alldigitalinputs and outputs shallbe protected against damage from transients or wrong voltages. Eachdigitalinput and digital output shallbe equipped with an LED for ease of service. Allfield wiring shallbe terminated at aseparate, clearly marked terminal strip. 5. The microprocessor shallhave abuilt-in time schedule. The schedule shallbe programmable from the unit keypadinterface. The schedule shallbe maintainedin nonvolatile memory to insure that it is not lost during apower failure. There shallbe one start/stopper day and aseparate holiday schedule. The controller shall accept up to sixteen holidays each with up to a5-day duration. Each unit shall also have the ability to accept atime schedule via BAS network communications. 6. If the unit is to be programmed with anight setback or setupfunction, an optional space sensor shallbe provided. Space sensors shallbe available to support field selectable features. Sensor options shallinclude Zone sensor with tenant override switch, or Zone sensor with tenant override switch andheating/cooling set point adjustment. ROOFTOPHEAT PUMP WITHOUT HEAT RECOVERY WHEEL A. MANUFACTURERS Basis of Design: Daikin Applied 1. Nortek –Governaire 2. Seasons 4 ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  3. Engineered Air 4. Energy Labs B. GENERAL DESCRIPTION 1. Furnish as shown on plans, Daikin AppliedRebelSingle Zone Heating andCooling Unit(s) model DPS. 2. Unit performance and electrical characteristics shallbe per the job schedule. 3. Configuration: Fabricate as detailed on prints anddrawings: a. Return plenum /economizer section b. Filter section c. Heat Pump coil section d. Supplyfan section e. Auxiliary Electric Heat f. Condensing unit section 4. The complete unit shallbe cETLus listed. 5. The unit shallbe ASHRAE90.1-2019 compliant andlabeled. 6. Each unit shallbe specificallydesignedfor outdoor rooftop application andinclude a weatherproof cabinet. Each unit shallbe completely factory assembled and shipped in one piece. Packaged units shallbe shippedfully charged withR-32Refrigerant and oil. 7. The unit shall undergo acomplete factory run test prior to shipment. The factory test shall include a refrigeration circuit run test, a unit control system operations checkout, aunit refrigerant leak test and afinal unit inspection. 8. All units shallhave decals and tags to indicate caution areas and aid unit service. Unit nameplates shall be fixed to the main controlpanel door. Electrical wiring diagrams shall be attached to the controlpanels. Installation, operating and maintenance bulletins and start-upforms shall be supplied with each unit. 9. Performance: All scheduledEER, IEER, capacities andface areas are minimum accepted values. All scheduled amps, kW, and HP are maximum accepted values that allow scheduled capacity to be met. 10. Warranty: The manufacturer shallprovide 12-monthparts only warranty. Defective parts shall be repaired or replaced during the warrantyperiod at no charge. The warranty period shall commence at startup or six months after shipment, whichever occurs first. C. CABINET, CASING AND FRAME 1. Panel construction shallbe double-wall construction for allpanels. Allfloor panels shall have asolid galvanized steel inner liner on the air stream side of the unit to protect insulation during service and maintenance. Insulation shall be aminimum of 2" thick with an R-value of13, and shallbe 2part injectedfoam. Paneldesign shallinclude no exposedinsulation edges. Unit cabinet shallbe designed to operate at total static pressures up to 5.0 inches w.g. 2. Exterior surfaces shallbe constructed ofpaintedgalvanized steel, for aesthetics andlong.term durability. Paint finish willinclude abase primer with ahigh-qualitypolyester resin topcoat. Finished, unabradedpanel surfaces shallbe exposed to an ASTMB117 salt spray environment and exhibit no visible red rust at aminimum of 3,000 hours exposure. Finished, abraded surfaces shall be tested per ASTMD1654, having amean scribe creepage not exceeding 1/16” at 1,000 hours minimum exposure to an ASTM B117 salt spray environment. Measurements of results shallbe quantified usingASTMD1654in conjunction with ASTM D610 and ASTM D714 to evaluate blister and rust ratings. 3. Service doors shallbe provided on the fan section, filter section, controlpanel section, andheating vestibule in order to provide user access to unit components. All service access doors shall be mounted on multiple, stainless-steel hinges and shall be secured by alatch system. Removable service panels securedby multiple mechanicalfasteners are not acceptable. 4. The unit base shall overhang the roof curbfor positive water runoff and shall seat on the roof curbgasket to provide a positive, weathertight seal. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  D. OUTDOOR/RETURN AIR SECTION 1. Unit shallbe provided with an outdoor air economizer section. The economizer section shall include outdoor, return, and exhaust air dampers. The economizer operation shall be fully integral to the mechanical cooling and allow up to 100% of mechanical cooling if needed to maintain the coolingdischarge air temperature. The outdoor air hood shallbe factoryinstalled and constructedfrom galvanized steelfinished with the same durable paint finish as the main unit. The hood shallinclude moisture eliminator filters to drain water awayfrom the entering air stream. The outside and return air dampers shallbe sized to handle 100% of the supply air volume. The dampers shall be parallel blade design. Damper blades shallbe gasketed with side seals to provide an air leakage rate of 1.5 cfm / square foot of damper area at 1” differentialpressure in according with testing definedin AMCA500. Abarometric exhaust damper shallbe provided to exhaust air out of the back of the unit. Abird screen shallbe provided to prevent infiltration of rain and foreign materials. Exhaust damper blades shall be lined with vinyl gasketing on contact edges. Control of the dampers shall be by afactoryinstalleddirect coupled actuator. Damper actuator shall be of the modulating, spring return type. A comparative enthalpy control shallbe provided to sense and compare enthalpy in both the outdoor and return air streams to determine if outdoor air is suitable for “free” cooling. If outdoor air is suitable for “free” cooling, the outdoor air dampers shall modulate in response to the unit’s temperature control system. 2. Steelfinished with the same durable paint finish as the main unit. The hood shallinclude a bird screen to prevent infiltration of foreign materials and arain lip to drain water away from the entering air stream. 3. UltraSeallow leakdampers shallbe provided. Damper blades shallbe fullygasketed and side sealed and arranged verticallyin the hood. Damper leakage shall be less than 1.5 CFM/Sq. Ft. ofdamper area at 1.0inch static pressure differential. Leakage rate to be testedin accordance with AMCA Standard500. Damper blades shall be operatedfrom multiple sets oflinkages mounted on the leavingface of the dampers. Control of the dampers shallbe from afactoryinstalled actuator. 4. Control of the outdoor dampers shallbe by afactoryinstalled actuator. Damper actuator shall be of the modulating type. Damper to open when supply fan starts, and close when supply fan stops. 5. Provide factoryinstalled and tested, outdoor air monitor that controls outdoor air +/-15% accuracydown to 40 cfm per ton. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  E. ENERGY RECOVERY 1. The rooftop unit shallbe designed with atrack so the entire energy recovery wheel cassette can slide out from the rooftop unit to facilitate cleaning. 2. The unit shallhave 2” Merv 8filters for the outdoor air before the wheel to helpkeep the wheel clean and reduce maintenance. Filter access shallbe by ahinged access door with . turn latches. 3. The matrix design shallhave channels to reduce cross contamination between the outdoor air and the exhaust air. The layers shallbe effectively capturedin aluminum and stainless-steel segment frames that provide arigid and self-supporting matrix. All diameter and perimeter seals shallbe provided as part of the cassette assembly and shall be factory set. Drive belt(s) of stretch urethane shall be providedfor wheel rim drive without the needfor external tensioners or adjustment. 4. The total energy recovery wheel shallbe coated with silica geldesiccant permanently bonded without the use of binders or adhesives, which may degrade desiccant performance. The substrate shall be lightweight polymer and shall not degrade nor require additional coatings for application in marine or coastal environments. Coated segments shall be washable with detergent or alkaline coil cleaner and water. Desiccant shall not dissolve nor deliquesce in the presence of water or high humidity. 5. Wheels shallbe provided with removable energy transfer matrix. Wheelframe construction shall be a welded hub, spoke and rim assembly of stainless, plated and/or coated steel and shall be self-supporting without matrix segments in place. Segments shall be removable without the use of tools to facilitate maintenance and cleaning. 6. Wheelbearings shallbe selected to provide an L-10life in excess of400,000hours. Rim shallbe continuous rolled stainless steel. Wheels shallbe connected to the shaft by means of taper lock hubs. 7. The exhaust air fan shallbe adirect drive SWSIplenum fan. The exhaust fan shallbe sizedfor the airflow requirements per the construction schedule. The unit controller shall control the exhaust fan to maintain buildingpressure. AVFD shallbe providedfor the exhaust fan motor, or the exhaust fan motor shall be an ECM motor. The rooftop unit shall have single point electrical power connection and shall be ETL listed. 8. The control of the energy recovery wheel shallbe an integralpart of the rooftop unit’s DDC controller. The DDC controller shallhave visibility of the outdoor air temperature, leaving wheel temperature, return air temperature, and exhaust air temperature. These temperatures shall be displayed at the rooftop units DDC controller LCD display. All of these temperatures shall be made available through the BACnet interface. 9. The rooftop unit with the energy recovery wheel shallincorporate the economizer operation. The energy recovery wheel shallhave abypass damper. When the unit is in the economizer mode of operation the energy recovery wheel shall stop and the bypass dampers shallbe opened. The outdoor air shallbe drawn through the bypass dampers to reduce the pressure drop of the outdoor airstream. 10. The rooftop unit (DDC controller shallprovide frost controlfor the energy recovery wheel. When afrost condition is encountered the unit controller shall stop the wheel. When in the frost control mode the wheel shall be jogged periodically and not be allowed to stayin the stationary position. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  F. EXHAUST FAN 1. Exhaust fan shallbe asingle width, single inlet (SWSI) airfoil centrifugalfan. The fan wheel shall be Class II construction with aluminum fan blades that are continuously welded to the hub plate and end rim. The exhaust fan shall be adirect drive fan mounted to the motor shaft. Belts and sheaves are not acceptable due to the additional maintenance. 2. The fan motor shallbe atotally enclosedEC motor that is speed controlledby the rooftop unit controller. The motor shallinclude thermal overloadprotection andprotect the motor in the case of excessive motor temperatures. The motor shallhave phase failure protection andprevent the motor from operation in the event of aloss ofphase. Motors shall be premium efficiency. 3. The unit DDC controller shallprovide building static pressure control. The unit controller shall provide proportional control of the exhaust fans from 25% to 100% of the supply air fan designed airflow to maintain the adjustable buildingpressure setpoint. The field shall mount the required sensing tubing from the building to the factory mounted building static pressure sensor. G. FILTERS 1. Unit shallbe provided with adraw-throughfilter section. The filter rack shallbe designed to accept a2” prefilter and a4” finalfilter. The unit design shallhave ahinged access door for the filter section. The manufacturer shall ship the rooftop unit with2” MERV 13 construction filters. The contractor shallfurnish andinstall, at building occupancy, the final set offilters per the contract documents. H. COOLING COIL 1. The indoor coil section shallbe installedin adraw through configuration, upstream of the supply air fan. The coil section shall be complete with a factory piped cooling coil and an ASHRAE 62.1 compliant double sloped drain pan. 2. The direct expansion (DX) cooling coils shallbe fabricated of seamless high efficiency copper tubing that is mechanically expandedinto high efficiency aluminum plate fins. Coils shallbe amulti-row, staggered tube design with aminimum of3 rows. All cooling coils shall have an interlaced coil circuiting that keeps the full coil face active at allload conditions. All coils shall be factory leak tested with high pressure air under water. 3. The cooling coil shallhave an electronic controlled expansion valve. The unit controller shall control the expansion valve to maintain liquid subcooling and the superheat of the refrigerant system. 4. The refrigerant suction lines shallbe fullyinsulatedfrom the expansion valve to the compressors. 5. The drain pan shallbe stainless steel andpositively sloped. The slope of the drain pan shallbe in two directions and comply withASHRAEStandard62.1. The drain pan shall have aminimum slope of 1/8" per foot to provide positive draining. The drain pan shall extendbeyond the leaving side of the coil. The drain pan shallhave athreadeddrain connection extending through the unit base. 6. Adrain pan overflow safety shall shut off the unit andissue awarningbefore over flow occurs. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  I. HOT GAS REHEAT 1. Unit shallbe equipped with afully modulatinghot gas reheat coil withhot gas coming from the unit condenser. 2. Hot gas reheat coil shallbe aMicro Channeldesign. The aluminum tube shallbe a micro channeldesign withhigh efficiency aluminum fins. Fins shallbe brazed to the tubingfor adirect bond. The capacity of the reheat coil shall allow for a20°F temperature rise at all operating conditions. 3. The modulatinghot gas reheat systems shall allow for independent control of the cooling coilleaving air temperature and the reheat coilleaving air temperature. The cooling coil and reheat coilleaving air temperature setpoints shallbe adjustable through the unit controller. During the dehumidification cycle the unit shallbe capable of100% of the cooling capacity. The hot gas reheat coil shallprovide discharge temperature control within +/-2°F. 4. Each coil shallbe factoryleak tested withhigh-pressure air under water. J. SUPPLY FAN 1. Supplyfan shallbe asingle width, single inlet (SWSI) airfoil centrifugalfan. The fan wheel shall be Class II construction withfan blades that are continuously welded to the hub plate and end rim. The supply fan shallbe adirect drive fan mounted to the motor shaft. Belts and sheaves are not acceptable due to the additional maintenance. 2. Allfan assemblies shall employ solid steelfan shafts. Heavy-dutypillow block type, self-aligning, grease lubricatedball bearings shall be used. Bearings shall be sized to provide a L-50 life at 250,000 hours. The entire fan assembly shall be isolatedfrom the fan bulkhead with aflexible collar and mounted on 1” spring isolators. 3. Allfan assemblies shallbe statically anddynamicallybalanced at the factory, including a final trim balance, prior to shipment. 4. (APPLICABLETOALLSELECTIONS)Supplyfan and motor assembly combinations larger than 8 hp or 22” diameter shallbe internally isolated on 1” deflection, spring isolators andinclude removable shipping tie downs. 5. The motor shallbe TFrame and open dripproof. Overloadprotection and speed control is provided by the factoryinstalled VFD and rooftop unit controller. The motor shallhave phase failure protection andprevent the motor from operation in the event of aloss of phase. Motors shall be premium efficiency. 6. The supplyfan shallbe capable of airflow modulation from 30% to 100% of the scheduleddesigned airflow. The fan shall not operate in astate of surge at anypoint within the modulation range. a. AllSupplyFans shallinclude afactoryinstalledflow measuring station. Airflow needs to be readable through the unit controller and building automation system. b. AllSupply andExhaust Fans shallinclude afactoryinstalledflow measuring station. Airflow needs to be readable through the unit controller andbuilding automation system. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  K. VARIABLE AIR VOLUME CONTROL 1. An electronic variable frequencydrive shallbe providedfor the supply air fan. Each drive shall be factory installed out of the air stream in aconditioned cabinet. Drives shall meet ULStandard95-5V. The completed unit assembly shallbe listedby arecognized safety agency, such as ETL. Drives are to be accessible through ahinged door assembly. Mounting arrangements that expose drives to high temperature unfiltered ambient air are not acceptable. 2. The unit manufacturer shallinstall allpower and control wiring. 3. The supply air fan drive output shallbe controlledby the factoryinstalled main unit control system anddrive status and operating speed shallbe monitored and displayed at the main unit control panel. L. HEATING SECTION 1. The rooftop unit shallinclude an electrical resistance heating coil section. Staged electric heating coil modules shallbe factoryinstalleddownstream of the supply air fan in the heating section of the rooftop unit. Heating coils shallbe constructed of alow watt density, nickel -chromium alloy resistance wire with intermediate supports that include ceramic bushings. The electrical contactors shallbe of the fullline-breaking type with all the electricalpower legs beingdisconnected when the contactors are not energized. All electrical circuit wiring shall be designed with copper conductors, aluminum wires are not acceptable. Heating element branch circuits shall be individuallyfused to amaximum of48Amps per NEC requirements. The power supplyfor the electric heater shallbe factory wired into the unit's main power block or disconnect switch. 2. The heating modules shallhave an automatic reset, high temperature limit safety protection. Asecondaryhighlimit protection shall also be provided that requires a manual reset. An airflow switch shallbe provided with the heating module to prevent the electric heater from operating in the event of no airflow. a. The electric heat elements shallbe controlledby the factoryinstalledDDC unit control system. The heater shallhave proportionalSCR control. The unit controller shall modulate the electric heater to maintain the discharge air temperature setpoint. 3. (APPLICABLETOALLUNITSWITHELECTRICHEAT)Fieldinstalledheating modules shall require afieldETL certification. Duct heaters mounted within the rooftop unit in the field shall not be acceptable. The manufacturer’s rooftop unit ETL certification shall cover the complete unit including the electric heating modules. 4. Electric heat output shalllimit heating output during compressor operation to 0%for purpose of maintaining reduced unit electrical operating requirements. Complete capacity ofinstalled electric heater shallbecome available during periods that compressor is not operating. M. HEAT PUMP HEATING 1. The evaporator coil, condenser coil, compressors and refrigerant circuit shallbe designed for heat pump operation. The refrigerant circuit shall contain a4-way reversing valve for the heat pump operation. The outdoor coil shallhave an electronic expansion valve to control the refrigerant flow. The unit controller shall modulate the expansion valve to maintain compressor operation within the compressor operational envelope. 2. The refrigerant system shall have a pump-down cycle. 3. Temperature setpoint. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  N. CONDENSING SECTION 1. Outdoor coils shallhave seamless copper tubes, mechanicallybondedinto aluminum plate-type fins. The fins shallhave fulldrawn collars to completely cover the tubes. A sub-cooling coil shallbe an integralpart of the main outdoor air coil. Each outdoor air coil shallbe factory leak tested withhigh-pressure air under water. 2. Fan motors shallbe an ECM type motor for proportional control. The unit controller shall proportionally control the speed of the condenser fan motors to maintain the head pressure of the refrigerant circuit in ambient conditions up to 125°F]. Mechanical cooling shallbe provided to 0°F. Heat PumpHeating shallbe provided to -10F. The motor shallinclude thermal overloadprotection andprotect the motor in the case of excessive motor temperatures. The motor shallhave phase failure protection andprevent the motor from operation in the event of a loss of phase. 3. The condenser fan shallbe low noise blade design. Fan blade design shallbe adynamic profile for low tip speed. Fan blade shallbe of acomposite material. 4. The unit shallhave scroll compressors. One of the compressors shallbe an inverter compressor providingproportional control. The unit controller shall control the speed of the compressor to maintain the discharge air temperature. [The inverter compressor shall have aseparate oilpump and an oil separator for each compressor that routes oil back to the compressor instead of through the discharge line. 5. Pressure transducers shallbe providedfor the suction pressure andheadpressure. Temperature sensor shall be provided for the suction temperature and the refrigerant discharge temperature of the compressors. All of the above devices shallbe an input to the unit controller and the values be displayed at the unit controller. 6. Refrigerant circuit shallhave abypass valve between the suction anddischarge refrigerant lines for low head pressure compressor starting and increased compressor reliability. When there is acallfor mechanical cooling the bypass valve shall open to equalizing the suction anddischarge pressures. When pressures are equalized the bypass valve shall close and the compressor shall be allowed to start. 7. Each circuit shallbe dehydrated andfactory charged withR32Refrigerant and oil. O. ELECTRICAL 1. Unit wiring shall comply withNEC requirements and with all applicable UL standards. All electrical components shall be UL recognized where applicable. All wiring and electrical components provided with the unit shall be number and color-coded and labeled according to the electrical diagram provided for easy identification. The unit shall be provided with afactory wired weatherproof controlpanel. Unit shall have asingle point power terminal blockfor main power connection. A terminalboard shall be providedfor low voltage control wiring. Branch short circuit protection, 115-volt control circuit transformer andfuse, system switches, and a high temperature sensor shall also be provided with the unit. Each compressor and condenser fan motor shall be furnished with contactors andinherent thermal overload protection. Supplyfan motors shallhave contactors and external overload protection. Knockouts shallbe providedin the bottom of the main control panels for field wiring entrance. 2. AGFI receptacle shallbe unit mounted. The receptacle shallbe poweredby afactory installed and wired120V, 15 amppower supply. The power supply shallbe wired to the line side of the unit's main disconnect, so the receptacle is powered when the main unit disconnect is off. This option shallinclude aGFI receptacle, 2.0KVA transformer and a branch circuit disconnect. The electrical circuit shallbe complete withprimary and secondary overload protection. 3. Asingle non-fuseddisconnect switch shallbe providedfor disconnecting electrical power at the unit. Disconnect switches shallbe mountedinternally to the controlpanel and operated by an externally mounted handle. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  P. CONTROLS 1. Provide acomplete integrated microprocessor basedDirect DigitalControl(DDC) system to control all unit functions including temperature control, scheduling, monitoring, unit safetyprotection, including compressor minimum run and minimum off times, anddiagnostics. This system shall consist of all required temperature sensors, pressure sensors, controller and keypad/display operator interface. AllMCBs and sensors shall be factory mounted, wired and tested. 2. (in nonvolatile memory. No settings shallbe lost, even during extendedpower shutdowns. 3. The DDC control system shallpermit starting and stopping of the unit locally or remotely. The control system shall be capable of providing aremote alarm indication. The unit control system shall provide for outside air damper actuation, emergency shutdown, remote heat enable/disable, remote cool enable/disable, heat indication, cool indication, andfan operation. 4. The DDC control system shallpermit starting and stopping of the unit locally or remotely. The control system shall be capable of providing aremote alarm indication. The unit control system shall provide for outside air damper actuation, emergency shutdown, remote heat enable/disable, remote cool enable/disable, heat indication, cool indication, andfan operation. 5. Alldigitalinputs and outputs shallbe protected against damage from transients or incorrect voltages. All field wiring shall be terminated at aseparate, clearly marked terminal strip. 6. The DDC controller shallhave abuilt-in time schedule. The schedule shallbe programmable from the unit keypad interface. The schedule shallbe maintained in nonvolatile memory to ensure that it is not lost during a power failure. There shallbe one start/stop per day and a separate holiday schedule. The controller shall accept up to sixteen holidays each with up to a5-day duration. Each unit shall also have the ability to accept atime schedule via BAS network communications. 7. The keypadinterface shall allow convenient navigation and access to all control functions. The unit keypad/display character format shallbe 4lines x20 characters. All control settings shallbe passwordprotected against unauthorized changes. For ease of service, the display format shall be Englishlanguage readout. Codedformats withlook.up tables will not be accepted. The user interaction with the display shallprovide the following information as aminimum: a. Return air temperature b. Discharge air temperature c. Outdoor air temperature d. Space air temperature e. Outdoor enthalpy, high/low f. Compressor suction temperature andpressure g. Compressor headpressure and temperature h. Expansion valve position i. Condenser fan speed j. Inverter compressor speed k. Dirtyfilter indication l. Airflow verification m. Cooling status n. Control temperature (Changeover). o. VAV box output status p. Cooling status/capacity q. Unit status r. All time schedules s. All time schedules t. Previous alarms with time anddate u. Optimal start v. Supplyfan and exhaust fan speed w. System operating hours 8. The user interaction with the keypad shallprovide the following: a. Controls mode b. Cooling andheating change-over temperature withdeadband c. Coolingdischarge air temperature (DAT) d. Supply reset options e. Temperature alarm limits f. Lockout controlfor compressors g. Compressor interstage timers h. Night setback and setup space temperature i. Building static pressure j. Economizer changeover k. Currently time and date l. Tenant override time m. Occupied/unoccupied time schedule n. One event schedule o. Holidaydates andduration p. Adjustable set points q. Service mode 9. If the unit is to be programmed with anight setback or setupfunction, an optional space sensor shall be provided. Space sensors shall be available to support field selectable features. Sensor options shallinclude: a. Zone sensor with tenant override switch b. Zone sensor with tenant override switchplus heating and cooling set point adjustment. (Space Comfort Control systems only) 10. To increase the efficiency of the cooling system the DDC controller shallinclude a discharge air temperature reset program for part load operating conditions. The discharge air temperature shall be controlled between aminimum and amaximum discharge air temperature (DAT) based on one of the followinginputs: a. Airflow b. Outside air temperature c. Space temperature d. Return air temperature e. External signal of1-5 vdc f. External signal of0-20Ma g. Network signal 11. Units shall contain eight programmable input/output controlports to be controlled using the connectedbuilding automation system. These ports shallbe input/output capable of utilizing the following signal types: a. mA signal(0-20 mA –Adjustable) b. VDC (0-10 VDC – Adjustable) c. 10k Thermistor d. Digital on/off ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  ROOF CURB A. Contractor shallprovide factory supplied roof curb, 16gauge perimeter made of zinc coated steel with supply and return air gasketing and wood nailer strips. Shipknockeddown and provided withinstructions for easy assembly. B. Curb shallbe manufacturedin accordance with the NationalRoofingContractors Association guidelines. END OF SECTION 23 7400 ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  SECTION 23 81 26 -SPLIT SYSTEM DX AIR CONDITIONING SYSTEM PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SECTION INCLUDES A. PackagedSplit System DX air handling units. B. Refrigeration components. 1.2 RELATED SECTIONS A. Section 230513 –Motors andStarters B. Section 234000 –Air Cleaning 1.3 REFERENCES A. ANSI/ASHRAE15 –SafetyCode for MechanicalRefrigeration. B. ANSI/ASHRAE/IES90.1A –2001 -EnergyConservation in New BuildingDesign Standard. C. ARI210/240 –UnitaryAir-ConditioningEquipment andAir-Source Heat PumpEquipment, (less than 135,000 Btuh). D. ARI360 –Commercial andIndustrialUnitaryAir ConditioningEquipment testing and rating standard, (equipment greater than 135,000 Btuh). E. ARI340 –Commercial andIndustrialUnitaryHeat PumpEquipment, (heat pumps above 135,000 Btuh). F. ANSIZ21.47/UL1995 –UnitaryAir ConditioningStandardfor safety requirements. 1.4 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Air HandlingUnits: Product of manufacturer regularly engagedin production of components who issues complete catalog data on total product. 1.5 SUBMITTALS A. Submit unit performance data including capacity, nominal and operatingperformance. B. Submit MechanicalSpecifications for unit and accessories describing construction, components and options. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  C. Submit shopdrawings indicating overalldimensions as well as installation, operation and service clearances. Indicate lift points and recommendations and center ofgravity. Indicate unit shipping, installation and operating weights including dimensions. D. Submit data on electrical requirements and connection points. Include recommended wire and fuse sizes or MCA, sequence of operation, safety and start-upinstructions. 1.6 DELIVERY, STORAGE, ANDHANDLING A. Comply with manufacturer's installation instructions for rigging, unloading, and transporting units. B. Store in clean dryplace andprotect from weather and construction traffic. Handle carefully to avoiddamage to components, enclosures, and finish. 1.7 ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS A. Do not operate units for anypurpose, temporary or permanent, untilductworkis clean, filters are in place, bearings lubricated, andfan has been test run under observation. 1.8 WARRANTY A. Provide one year parts warranty. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 DUCTED SPLIT SYSTEM AIR CONDITIONERS A. SUMMARY 1. The contractor shallfurnish andinstall air handling units(s) as shown as scheduled on the contract documents. The unit(s) shallbe installedin accordance with this specification and perform at the specified conditions as scheduled. 2. ApprovedManufacturers: a. Daikin. b. Trane. c. Carrier: d. York. B. GENERAL 1. Provide indoor-mounted, draw-thru, split air conditioning unit(s). Unit(s) shallbe factory-assembledincluding direct-expansion evaporator coil, expansion valve(s), check valves, condensate drain pan, centrifugalfan assembly withfan motor(s) and mounting bracket sheaves, drives andbelts, filters, and electrical controls. Units shallbe suitable for either horizontal or vertical airflow configuration and be used with or without ductwork. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  C. CASING 1. Unit casing shallbe constructed of zinc-coated, heavygauge, galvanized steel. Exterior surfaces shall be cleaned, phosphatized and finished with a baked enamelfinish. 2. Unit casing shallbe completelyinsulated withfire-retardant, permanent, foil-faced, odorless glass fiber material. D. FANS 1. Provide fan section withforward curved, double width, double inlet, centrifugal type fan. 2. Provide self-aligning, grease lubricated, ball or roller bearings withpermanent lubrication fittings. 3. Factory mount motor on slide rails. Provide access to motor, drive, andbearings through removable casing panels. 4. Provide shafts constructed of solidhot rolled steel, ground andpolished, withkey-way, and protectively coated with lubricating oil. 5. Provide cast iron or steel variable and adjustable pitched sheaves, dynamicallybalanced, bored to fit shafts and keyed. E. COILS 1. Provide configured aluminum fin surface mechanicallybonded to copper tubing coil. Enclose coils withheaders and return bends fully contained within casing. Coil shall have factoryinstalled expansion valves and factorypressure and leak tested at 375 psig. 2. Provide double sloped condensate drain pan constructed ofPVC with external connections on either side of unit. The drain pan shallbe removable for cleaning. F. FILTERS 1. Provide one inch throwawayfilters, factoryinstalled. Provide access from side panelfor removal. Filter rack shallbe field convertible to two inch capability withfieldprovided two inch throwaway filters. G. CONTROLS 1. Provide factoryinstalled and wired controls includingfan contactor, low voltage terminal strip and single point power entry. 2. Provide factoryinstalled evaporator defrost control to prevent coilfreezing at low evaporator temperatures. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  H. MISCELLANEOUS FEATURES 1. Hydronic Heat Coils: Provide hot water, one row coils enclosedin painted sheet metal enclosure for mounting on the discharge of the air handling unit. Factory-supplied and field-installed for either vertical or horizontal airflow. 2. Electric HeatingCoils: Provide electric heat coils constructed ofheavy-duty nickel chromium elements with pilot duty or automatic line breakhighlimit controls. Coils shall be UL listed and installedin insulated sheet metal enclosure for installation on fan discharge, factory-supplied and field-installed. 3. Thermostats: Provide 24 volt operation control, factory-supplied andfield-installed. For specifications see air-cooled condensing unit, section 23 62 13. 4. Vibration Isolators: Provide springfloor-mountedisolators to reduce transmission of noise and vibration to building structures. 5. Low ambient operation shallbe provided and shallbe accomplishedby means of an opposedblade damper assembly or variable speedfans as furnished by the manufacturer andfieldinstalled at the condenser air inlet and connects to the liquidline. Unit shall operate effectivelydown to 0˚F. DUCTLESS SPLIT SYSTEM AIR CONDITIONERS A. ACCEPTABLE MANUFACTURERS: LG Electronics. B. INDOOR UNIT 1. Furnish andinstall aductless-split air conditioning system as shown on the plans and as listedbelow. The indoor unit shallbe factory assembled, wired, and run tested. 2. The unit cabinet shallbe supplied with aseparate backplate and multi-directionaldrain and refrigerant piping. The casing shallhave awhite finish. Cabinet shallbe rigidly mounted to the wall without vibration. 3. The evaporator fan shallbe an assembly with aline-flow fan direct driven by asingle motor. The fan shallbe statically anddynamicallybalanced and run on amotor with permanentlylubricatedbearings. The fan shall consist of three (3) speeds: High, Medium, and Low. 4. Amanual adjustable guide vane shallbe provided. 5. Return air shallbe filteredby means of easily removed, washable, Catechin, Antioxidant Pre-filter, and an Anit-allergy enzyme filter – blue bellows type. 6. The evaporator coil shallbe of nonferrous construction with smoothplate fins on copper tubing. The tubing shallhave inner groves for high efficiencyheat exchange. All tube joints shallbe brazed withphoscopper or silver alloy. Coils shallbe pressure tested at the factory. 7. Acondensate pan anddrain shallbe provided under the evaporator coil. 8. The unit shallhave awireless controller to perform input functions necessary to operate the system andhave afieldinstalledhard-wired remote controller. The controller shall consist of apower on/off switch, mode selector, temperature setting, timer control, fan speed selector and auto vane selector. The unit shallperform self-diagnostic function, test run switching, and check mode switching. Temperature changes shallbe by1F increments with arange of65-87F. The microprocessor shallhave the capability of ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 sensing return air temperatures andindoor coil temperature, receiving and processing commands from the wireless and wired controller, provide emergency operation and controlling the outdoor unit. 9. The unit shallbe equipped withpulse amplitude modulation (PAM) controlfor efficiency. Indoor unit shallbe powereddirectlyfrom the outdoor unit. C. OUTDOOR UNIT 1. Furnish andinstall split air conditioning system as shown on the plans and as listed below. 2. The outdoor unit shallbe completelyfactory assembled, piped, wired, and run tested. 3. The casing shallbe fabricated ofgalvanized steel, bonderized, finished with electrostatically applied, thermallyfused acrylic powder coatingfor corrosion protection. 4. The condenser unit shallbe furnished with adirect drive propeller type fan with permanentlylubricatedbearings. The fan shallbe provided with araisedguard to prevent contact with movingparts. The unit shallhave ahorizontaldischarge airflow. 5. The condenser coil shallbe of nonferrous construction withlanced or corrugatedplate fins on copper tubing and shallbe protected with an integral metalguard. The refrigerant flow from the condenser shallbe controlledby means of ametering orifice. 6. The compressor motor shallbe of ahighperformance hermetic, inverter driven, variable speed, rotary type. The unit shallhave an accumulator. The compressor shallbe equipped with an internal thermal overload. The unit must have the ability to operate with amaximum height difference of 35feet and have a refrigerant tubinglength of 65 feet between the indoor and outdoor units without the need for line size changes, traps, or additional oil. The compressor shallbe mounted to avoid the transmission of vibration. 7. Low ambient operation shallbe provided and shallbe accomplishedby means of an opposedblade damper assembly as furnished by the manufacturer andfieldinstalled at the condenser air inlet and connected to the factory mounted schreader fitting on the liquidline. This is to be accomplished without loss of refrigerant. Unit is to operate effectively to 0 degree Fahrenheit. 8. The unit shallbe capable of satisfactory operation at scheduled voltage. The outdoor unit shall be controlled by a microprocessor located in the indoor unit and outdoor unit. PART 3 -EXECUTION INSTALLATION A. Installin accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Install unit on vibration isolators. Reference Section 230548. END OF SECTION 23 8126 ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  SECTION 23 81 29 -VARIABLE REFRIGERANT FLOWHVAC SYSTEMS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. The requirements of the General Conditions, Supplementary Conditions and the following Specification sections apply to allWork herein: 1. Section 230513 –Motors andStarters 2. Section 234000 –Air Cleaning 1.2 SUMMARY A. Provideallvariablerefrigerantflow(VRF)systemsascompleteoperatingsystemsinaccordance with the requirements indicated on the drawings and within the Construction Documents. B. This section includes: 1. Indoor, concealed, ceiling-mounted units. 2. Indoor, exposed, wall-mounted units. 3. Indoor, concealed, multi-position air handling units. 4. Indoor, 4-Way Ceiling Cassettes. 5. Branch circuit (BC) controllers. 6. Outdoor, air-source heat recovery heat pump units. 7. System controls. 1.3 REFERENCE STANDARDS A. All variable refrigerant flow (VRF) units shall be designed, manufactured, and tested in accordance with the latest applicable industry standards including the following: 1. ANSI/AHRI340/360 2. ANSI/AHRI1230 3. ANSI/AHRI/ASHRAE/ISO 13256-1 4. ASHRAE 15 5. NFPA 70 B. AllequipmentandmaterialtobefurnishedandinstalledonthisProjectshallbeULorETLlisted, in accordance with the requirements of the authorities having jurisdiction and suitable for its intended use on this Project. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  1.4 SUBMITTALS AND PROPOSALS A. The following submittaldata shallbe furnished according to the GeneralConditions andSection 23 00 10 and shall include, but not be limited to: 1. Cooling and heating performance data. All indoor units shall be provided with performance data based on a 75., 50% RH return air temperature in cooling mode and 72. in heating mode unless otherwise noted within the schedules. 2. Refrigerant type and refrigerant charge for each system. 3. Filter data. a. Motor data and electrical characteristics b. Control valve andpipingdata. c. Drawings indicating physical layout, piping connections, electrical connections, dimensions, weight and point load weights. d. All options provided with the system. e. Any special tools that maybe required. f. Manufacturer’s installation instructions anddetails 4. Calculationswithcorrespondingdiagram ofrefrigerantpipingandtubingsizingforeach system installed, inclusive of the location of the branch circuit controller. 5. Calculations with corresponding floor plans indicating that refrigerant concentration limits are within allowable limits of ASHRAE 15 andgoverning codes. 6. Calculations showing that system travel distance for refrigerant piping and controls cabling are within horizontal and verticaltraveldistances setby manufacturer. Providea comparison table for each system installed. 7. Two-dimensional refrigerant flow diagram inclusive of every component in the system, including, but not limited to, indoor units, outdoor units, branch circuit controllers, etc. 8. Product Specific Environmental Product Declarations (EPD’s) with Global Warming Potential(GWP)data including quantity takeoff of associated material and equipment. B. Allitemsorequipmentlistedabovewithasterisks(*)shallbecertifiedbythemanufacturerusing Manufacturer Certification “MCA”. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 ACCEPTABLE MANUFACTURERS A. If it complies with these Specifications, variable refrigerant flow (VRF) units manufactured by one of the following manufacturers willbe acceptable: 1. Daikin 2. LG 3. Mitsubishi 4. Toshiba. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  INDOOR, CONCEALED, CEILIING-MOUNTED UNITS A. Indoor unit shallbe aconcealedductedindoor fan coil type that mounts above the ceiling with a fixed return and a horizontal supply air discharge. Each unit shall be factory-assembled, -wired, and run-tested. B. The unit shall contain afilter box, circulatingfan(s) and motor, refrigerant coil, drippan, factory wiring, piping, electronic modulatinglinear expansion device and control circuit board. The unit shall have a self-diagnostic function, 3-minute time delay mechanism, an auto-restart function, and a test-run switch. System shall auto-restart on Power Failure. Each indoor unit shall be able to lose power without taking down the entire system. Indoor unit and refrigerant pipes shall be charged with dehydrated air before shipment from the factory. C. The unit cabinet shall have multi-directional drain and refrigerant piping offering four (4) directionsfor refrigerantpiping andtwo (2)directionsfor draining as standard. The cabinet shall be fitted with a return air filter box and long-life filter. D. Fan assembly shall consist of one (1) or two (2) fans direct-driven by a single motor with permanent lubricated bearings. Fan assembly shall be statically and dynamicallybalanced. E. The coil shall be of non-ferrous construction with smooth plate aluminum fins mechanically bondedto copper tubing with enhancedinner surface to improve heat exchange efficiency. Tube ends and joints shall be brazed with BCuP or BAg alloy filler material. Each coil shall be pressure-tested at the factory. F. Microprocessor Control 1. The unit shall have a factory installed microprocessor controller capable of performing functions necessary to operate the system with or without the use of a wall mounted controller. The unit shall have a factory mounted return air thermistor for use as a space temperature control device. All operating parameters except scheduling shall be stored in non-volatile memory resident on the microprocessor. The microprocessor shall provide the following functions, self-diagnostics, auto re-start after a power failure and a test run mode. 2. The unit shall be able to communicate with other indoor units and the condensing unit using a field supplied minimum of 18 AWG, two core, stranded, twisted, and shielded communication cable. 3. The unit controls shall operate the indoor unit using one of the five operating modes: a. Auto changeover (Heat RecoverySystem only) b. Heating c. Cooling d. Dry e. Fan only 4. The unit shall be able to operate in either cooling or heating mode for testing and/or commissioning. 5. The unit shall be able to operate with the fan turned off during system cooling thermal off. 6. The unit shallbe able to operate with acontinuous fan setting. 7. The unit shall have adjustable, multi-step cooling and heating mode thermal on/off temperature range settings. 8. The system shallinclude aproduct checkfunction to access anddisplayindoor unittype and capacity from a wired programmable thermostat controller. Each thermostat controller shall be Wi-Fi capable. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  G. Electrical Requirements 1. The unit shall be capable of operating within voltage limits of +/-10% of the rated voltage. INDOOR, CONCEALED, MULTI-POSITION AIR HANDLING UNITS. A. Indoor unit shall be a concealed ducted indoor fan coil type that is floor mounted in the configurationrequiredfordimensionalandperformancecoordinationateachlocations.Eachunit shall be factory-assembled, -wired, and run-tested. B. The unit shall contain afilter box, circulatingfan(s) and motor, refrigerant coil, drippan, factory wiring, piping, electronic modulatinglinear expansion device and control circuit board. The unit shall have a self-diagnostic function, 3-minute time delay mechanism, an auto-restart function, and a test-run switch. System shall auto-restart on Power Failure. Each indoor unit shall be able to lose power without taking down the entire system. Indoor unit and refrigerant pipes shall be charged with dehydrated air before shipment from the factory. C. The unit cabinet shall have multi-directional drain and refrigerant piping offering four (4) directionsforrefrigerantpipingandtwo(2)directionsfordrainingasstandard.Refrigerantpiping connections shall be brazed wherever possible. The cabinet shall be fitted with a return air filter box andlong-life filter. D. Fan assembly shall consist of one (1) or two (2) fans direct-driven by a single motor with permanent lubricated bearings. Fan assembly shall be statically and dynamicallybalanced. E. The coil shall be of non-ferrous construction with smooth plate aluminum fins mechanically bondedto copper tubing with enhancedinner surface to improve heat exchange efficiency. Tube ends and joints shall be brazed with BCuP or BAg alloy filler material. Each coil shall be pressure-tested at the factory. F. Microprocessor Control 1. The unit shall have a factory installed microprocessor controller capable of performing functions necessary to operate the system with or without the use of a wall mounted controller. The unit shall have a factory mounted return air thermistor for use as a space temperature control device. All operating parameters except scheduling shall be stored in non-volatilememoryresidentonthemicroprocessor.Themicroprocessorshallprovidethe followingfunctions,self-diagnostics,autore-startafterapowerfailureandatestrunmode. ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 2. The unit shall be able to communicate with other indoor units and the condensing unit using a field supplied minimum of 18 AWG, two core, stranded, twisted, and shielded communication cable. 3. The unit controls shall operate the indoor unit using one of the five operating modes: a. Auto changeover (Heat RecoverySystem only) b. Heating c. Cooling d. Dry e. Fan only 4. The unit shall be able to operate in either cooling or heating mode for testing and/or commissioning. 5. The unit shallbe able to operate withthe fan turned offduring system coolingthermal off. 6. The unit shallbe able to operate with acontinuous fan setting. 7. The unit shall have adjustable, multi-step cooling and heating mode thermal on/off temperature range settings. 8. The system shall include a product check function to access and display indoor unit type and capacityfrom awiredprogrammablethermostat controller. Eachthermostat controller shall be Wi-Fi capable. G. Electrical Requirements 1. Theunitshallbecapableofoperatingwithinvoltagelimitsof+/-10% oftheratedvoltage. INDOOR, EXPOSED, WALL-MOUNTED UNITS A. Indoorunitshallbeanexposed,wall-mountedindoorfancoiltypethatattachestoaninstallation plate/bracket that secures the unitto the wall. Each unit shallhave one supply air outlet and one return air inlet with a motorized sweeping guide vane that automatically changes the direction ofairflowfromside-to-sideandup-and-down.Eachunitshallbefactory-assembled,-wired,and run-tested. B. The unit shall contain a washable filter, circulating fan and motor, refrigerant coil, drip pan, factory wiring, piping, electronic modulatinglinear expansion device and control circuit board. The unit shall have a self-diagnostic function, 3-minute time delay mechanism, an auto-restart function, and a test-run switch. System shall auto-restart on Power Failure. Each indoor unit shall be able to lose power without taking down the entire system. Indoor unit and refrigerant pipes shallbe charged withdehydrated air before shipment from the factory. C. The unit cabinet shall have multi-directional drain and refrigerant piping offering four (4) directions for refrigerant piping and two (2) directions for draining as standard. Refrigerant pipingconnectionsshallbebrazedwhereverpossible.Thecabinetshallbefittedwithawashable return air filter accessible without the use of tools. D. Fan assembly shall consist of one (1) fan direct-driven by a single motor with permanent lubricatedbearings. Fan assembly shall be statically and dynamically balanced. E. The coil shall be of non-ferrous construction with smooth plate aluminum fins mechanically bondedtocoppertubingwithenhancedinnersurfacetoimproveheatexchangeefficiency.Tube ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 ends and joints shall be brazed with BCuP or BAg alloy filler material. Each coil shall be pressure-tested at the factory. F. Microprocessor Control 1. The unit shall have a factory installed microprocessor controller capable of performing functions necessary to operate the system with or without the use of a wall mounted zone controller. The unit shall have a factory mounted return air thermistor for use as a space temperature control device. All operating parameters except scheduling shall be stored in non-volatilememoryresidentonthemicroprocessor.Themicroprocessorshallprovidethe followingfunctions,self-diagnostics,autore-startafterapowerfailureandatestrunmode. 2. The unit shallbe able to communicate with other indoor units andthe outdoor unit using a field supplied minimum of 18 AWG, two core stranded, twisted, and shielded communication cable (RS-485). 3. The unit controls shall operate the indoor unit using one of the five operating modes: a. Auto changeover (Heat RecoverySystem only) b. Heating c. Cooling d. Dry e. Fan only 4. The unit shall be able to operate in either cooling or heating mode for testing and/or commissioning. 5. The unit shall have adjustable, multi-step cooling and heating mode thermal on/off temperature range settings. 6. The system shall include a product check function to access and display indoor unit type and capacityfrom a wiredprogrammable thermostat controller. 7. Unitshallhaveafieldsettablemethodtochoose autofan speed change operationbasedon mode of operation, on/off fan operation based on mode of operation, or continuous minimum set fan speed operation. G. Electrical Requirements 1. Theunitshallbecapableofoperatingwithinvoltagelimitsof+/-10% oftheratedvoltage. INDOOR, 4-WAY CEILING CASSETTES A. Indoor unit shall be either a nominal 2’x’2 or 3’x’3 chassis cassette designed to be recessed-mounted in the ceiling. Each unit shall have four supply air outlets, each equipped with independent oscillating motorized guide vane designed to change the airflow direction. and one return air inlet. Each unit shallbe factory-assembled, -wired, and run-tested. B. The unit shall contain a washable filter, circulating fan and motor, refrigerant coil, drip pan, factory wiring, piping, electronic modulating linear expansion device and control circuit board. The unit shall have a self-diagnostic function, 3-minute time delay mechanism, an auto-restart function,andatest-runswitch.Systemshallauto-restartonPowerFailure.Eachindoorunitshall be able to lose power without taking down the entire system. Indoor unit and refrigerant pipes shall be charged withdehydrated air before shipment from the factory. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  C. The unit cabinet shall have multi-directional drain and refrigerant piping offering four (4) directionsforrefrigerantpipingandtwo(2)directionsfordrainingasstandard.Refrigerantpiping connections shallbe brazedwherever possible. The cabinet shallbe fitted with awashablereturn air filter accessible without the use of tools. D. Fan assembly shall consist of one (1) fan direct-driven by a single motor with permanent lubricatedbearings. Fan assembly shall be statically and dynamically balanced. E. The coil shall be of non-ferrous construction with smooth plate aluminum fins mechanically bondedto copper tubing with enhancedinner surface to improve heat exchange efficiency. Tube ends and joints shall be brazed with BCuP or BAg alloy filler material. Each coil shall be pressure-tested at the factory. F. Microprocessor Control 1. The unit shall have a factory installed microprocessor controller capable of performing functions necessary to operate the system. 2. The unit shallbe able to communicate with other indoor units andthe outdoor unit using a field supplied minimum of 18 AWG, two core, stranded, twisted and shielded communication cable. 3. The unit controls shall operate the indoor unit using one of the five operating modes: a. Auto changeover (Heat RecoverySystem only) b. Heating c. Cooling d. Dry e. Fan only 4. The unit shall be able to operate in either cooling or heating mode for testing and/or commissioning. 5. The unit shallbe able to operate withthe fan turned offduring system coolingthermal off. 6. The unit shall have adjustable, multi-step cooling and heating mode thermal on/off temperature range settings. 7. The system shall include a product check function to access and display indoor unit type and capacityfrom a wiredprogrammable thermostat controller. 8. Unitshallhaveafieldsettablemethodtochoose autofan speed change operationbasedon mode of operation, on/offfan operation G. Electrical Requirements 1. Theunitshallbecapableofoperatingwithinvoltagelimitsof+/-10% oftheratedvoltage. BRANCH CIRCUIT (BC) CONTROLLERS A. The branch circuit (BC) controllers shall include multiple liquid and gas branches to allow simultaneous heating and cooling by allowing either hot gas refrigerant to flow to indoor unit(s) for heating or subcooled liquid refrigerant to flow to indoor unit(s) for cooling. Refrigerant used for cooling must always be subcooledfor optimalindoor unit LEV performance. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  B. BC controllers shall be equipped with circuit boards that interface using Ethernet 10 Base T protocol that controls the system and performs all functions necessary for operation. The BC controllershallbecompletelyfactory-assembled,-pipedand-wired.Eachunitshallberun-tested atthefactory. This unitshallbemountedindoors, withaccess and serviceclearance providedfor each controller. The sum of connected capacity of all indoor air handlers shall range from 50% to 150% of rated capacity. C. Each VRF system shall include at least one (1) unused branch or branch devices for future use. Branchesshallbefullyinstalledandwiredinacentrallocationwithcappedserviceshutoffvalve and service port. D. EachBCcontrollerbranchshallconnecttoindoorunit(s)notexceeding54,000Btu/hperbranch. E. The BC unit cabinet casing shall be fabricated of galvanized steel. Each cabinet shall house a liquid-gas separator and multiple refrigeration control valves and two tube-in-tube heat exchangers. F. All connections to the BC controller shallbe brazed. G. Refrigerant Valves 1. Units shallbe furnished with multiple two-position refrigerant valves. 2. Eachcircuitshallhaveone(1)(54,000Btu/horsmallerindoorunitsection)two-position liquidline valve and atwo-position suction line valve. 3. When connecting a 54,000 Btu/h or larger indoor unit section, two (2) branch circuits shall be joined together at the branch controller to deliver an appropriate amount of refrigerant. The two (2) refrigerant valves shall operate simultaneously. 4. Linear electronic expansion valves shallbe used to control the variable refrigerant flow. H. An integral condensate pan anddrain connection shallbe provided. I. Electrical Requirements 1. Theunitshallbecapableofoperatingwithinvoltagelimitsof+/-10% oftheratedvoltage. 2. The BC controller shallbe controlledbyintegral microprocessors. SYSTEM CONTROLS A. The controls network shall be capable of supporting remote controllers, centralized controllers, an integratedweb-basedinterface,graphical userworkstation, and system integration tobuilding management and control system (BMCS) via BACnet. B. The controls network shall consist of alow-voltage communication network, remote controllers, centralized controllers and/or integrated web-based interface communicating over a high-speed communication bus. The controls network shall support operation monitoring, scheduling, occupancy, error e-mail distribution, personal web browsers and integration with BMCS using BACnet interfaces. A web controller with a network interface card shall gather data from this system and generate web pages accessible through a conventional web browser on each PC ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 connected to the network. Operators shall be able to perform all normal operator functions through the web browser interface. C. The BACnet interface shall be compliant with BACnet protocol and be certified by the BACnet Testing Laboratories (BTL). The BACnet interface shall support a BACnet Broadcast Management Device (BBMD). Operation and monitoring points include, but are not limited to, on/off, operation mode, fan speed, prohibit remote controller, filter sign reset, alarm state, error code and error address. D. The controls system shall include energy conservation features such as optimal start, night setback,request-basedlogicanddemand-leveladjustmentofoverallsystemcapacityasspecified in the sequence. E. Thesystemshallprovidedirect-actingandreverse-actingonandoffalgorithmsbasedonaninput condition orgroup conditions tocycle abinary outputor multiple binary outputs. It shallprovide capability for future system expansion to include monitoring and use of occupant card access, lighting control and general equipment control and be capable of e-mail generation for remote alarm annunciation. F. The controls network shall operate at 30 VDC. Controller power and communications shall be viaacommonnon-polarcommunicationsbususingtwo(2)-conductorstranded16AWGtwisted shielded wire. Network wiring shall be CAT-6 with RJ45 connections. G. The wiring shall be installed control wiring from indoor unit to indoor unit, to the BC controller (main and subs, if applicable) and to the water/air-source unit and shall be installed in a daisy chainconfiguration.Wiringtoremotecontrollersshallberunfromtheindoorunitterminalblock to the controller associated with that unit. H. The controlssystem shallprovide ameansformetering electricalconsumption ofindividualunit operation. This manufacturer’s proportional power distribution (PPD) metering software shall include all licenses and accessories as required to achieve the required metering in coordination withtheDivision26providedelectricalmetersatcentralizedequipmentforthelifeofthesystem, aminimum offifteen (15)years. The output ofthe PPD metering software shallbe customizable to suit the needs of the Owner. OUTDOOR AIR-SOURCE HEAT RECOVERY HEAT PUMPS A. Air-sourceheatrecoveryheatpumpsshallbespecificallyusedwithmatchingcomponentsbythe samemanufacturer.TheyshallutilizerefrigerantR-32andshallbeequippedwithmultiplecircuit boards that interface to the control systems and shall perform all functions necessary for operation. The heat recovery system shall allow each indoor unit or group of indoor units to operate in either heating or cooling independently of other indoor units. Each unit module shall be completelyfactory-assembled, piped, wired and run-tested at the factory. B. The individual air-source heat recovery heat pump shall have a sound rating no higher than 51 dBA; when twinned together, the resultant sound level shall be no higher than 54 dBA. If an alternate manufacturer is furnished, any additional material, cost and/or labor required to meet published sound levels shall be included at no additional cost to the Owner. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  C. The air-source heat recovery heat pumps are intended for installation outdoors at ambient temperatures between -13°F and 122°F as standard, being able to deliver 100% of the rated heating performance at -13°F and 100% of the rated cooling performance at 115°F. Each unit shall include the following: 1. A high-efficiency oil separator plus additional logic controls to ensure that adequate oil volume is maintained in the compressor. 2. An accumulator with refrigerant level sensors and controls. 3. Ahigh-pressure safety switch, overcurrent protection andDCbus protection. D. Unit Cabinet 1. The cabinet(s) shall be fabricated of hot-dip galvanized steel sheet with a weather and corrosion resistant enamel finish. 2. Cabinets shallhave the option of allfield connections(refrigerant,line voltage andcontrol wiring) on the top or left side of the unit. They shall also have the option of drain line connections either in the front or the back. E. Inverter Cooler 1. Each unit shallhave an internaldirect-expansion-type inverter cooler. F. Compressors 1. Each air-source module and outdoor unit shall be equipped with one (1) inverter-driven scroll hermetic compressor with factory-mounted crankcase heater(s) mounted on vibration isolation devices. Non-inverter-driven compressors that cause inrush current (demand charges) and require larger wire sizing shall not be allowed. 2. The outdoor unitcompressor shallbe completely variable with aturndown of23% -7% of rated capacity, depending upon unit size. 3. Compressor shallbe equipped with an internal thermal overload. G. Defrost Options 1. The outdoorunit(s)shallbecapable ofauto defrost operationtomeltaccumulatedfrostoff the outdoor unit heat exchanger. The defrost cycle control shall monitor the outdoor ambient temperature and outdoor unit heat exchanger surface temperature. 2. The frequency of operatingthe defrost cycle shallbe determinedby the system’s abilityto maintain sufficient system head pressure to deliver comfortable warm air to the building. H. Electrical Requirements 1. Theunitshallbecapableofoperatingwithinvoltagelimitsof+/-10% oftheratedvoltage. 2. The system shall remain operational upon loss ofpower to one (1)indoor fan coil unit. ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 INSTALLATION A. All systems, components, piping and all accessories shall be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturer’s requirements by a Contractor with extensive installation experience and service trainingin the installation of VRF systems. B. Provide alllabor and materials to support VRF equipment from structure. C. VRF systems shall be installed as detailed on the approved shop drawings. Prior to installation, verify all requiredfield measurements. D. Rig and install all equipment in full accordance with manufacturer’s requirements and the Contract Documents. Provide service clearance per manufacturer’s installation manual. E. All equipment shall be installed level and true on resilient isolators and structural supports as required. F. The Installing Contractor shall provide and install all accessories and piping for a fully operational system in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation manual. The installation shall be in conformance with the following: 1. Traps, filter driers and sight glasses shall not to be installed on the refrigerant piping or condensate lines. 2. Proprietary manufacturer-specific appurtenances are not allowed. Standard ACR fittings shall be used. 3. Refrigerant piping shallhave aminimum wall thickness of0.030inches . 4. Flare connection shall follow dimensions provided in the manufacturer’s installation manuals. G. Upon completing allpressure andleaktests, the refrigerantlines, as well as any valves, shallbe insulatedin accordance with the requirements ofSection 23 07 00 – Thermal Insulation. H. The InstallingContractor shall coordinate electrical requirements and connectionsfor allpower feeds with Electrical Contractor. 3.2 STARTUP A. Provide manufacturer's field representative to perform system startup. B. Prepare and start equipment and system in accordance with manufacturer's instructions and recommendations. C. Adjust equipment for proper operation within manufacturer's published tolerances. END OF SECTION 23 8129 ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  SECTION 23 82 39 -HEATING TERMINAL UNITS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SUBMITTALS A. Submit manufacturer’s product data: 1. Performance data. 2. Drawings. a. Dimensions b. Support requirements c. Size andlocation of connections 3. Enclosure gauges. 4. Accessories. 5. Parts lists. 6. AdditionalSubmittalRequirements: a. Wiringdiagrams. b. Installation, operating and maintenance instructions. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 GENERAL A. Except as otherwise indicated, provide manufacturer’s standardproducts as indicatedby published product information, and as required for a complete installation. 2.2 ELECTRIC CABINET HEATERS A. Manufacturers: 1. Design Basis: Q. Mark. 2. Other Acceptable Manufacturers: a. Carrier b. Trane c. McQuay d. Dunham-Bush B. Construction: 1. Casing: a. Material: 16 gauge steel. b. Corners: Rounded. c. Finish: Phosphatized andpaintedinside and out. d. Color: SelectedbyArchitect from manufacturer’s standard colors. 2. Grilles: Operable louver. 3. HeatingElement: Finned, sheath type. 4. Controls: a. Contactors to energize heating coil. b. High temperature limit switch. c. Interlocks to prevent heater operation unless fan is running. d. Furnishline voltage thermostat for remote (wall) mounting. 5. UL listed. 6. Accessories: ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  a. Mountingbracket. ELECTRIC UNIT HEATERS A. Manufacturers: 1. Design Basis: Modine. 2. Other Acceptable Manufacturers: a. Carrier b. McQuay c. Dunham-Bush d. Trane B. Construction: 1. Casing: a. Material: Steel. b. Finish: Baked-on enamel. c. HeatingElement Supports: Adjustable. d. Gaskets: Between front panel and enclosure. 2. Grilles: Louver: Adjustable. 3. HeatingElement: Finned steel sheaths providing extended surface. 4. Provide manufacturer’s written certification that unit is suitable for use at altitude of the project. C. Controlbox housing, allheater wiring controls and contractors shallbe located at bottom of heater and equipped with swingdown hinged cover. Wiringdiagram shallbe attached to the inside of the control box cover. D. 3-Pole units shallhave abuilt in heavyduty3-pole contactor. E. Heating element shallbe of non-flowingdesign consisting of special resistance wire enclosedin asteel sheath to which steelplate fins are brazed. Heating element shall cover the entire air discharge area for uniform heating. F. Thermal safety cutout shallbe built into system to automatically shut offheater in event of overheating. ME Engineers May 16, 2025 St. John’s University 006.3926.400 Issue for Permit Basketball Training Facility 175-02 Union Turnpike Jamaica, NY 11439 G. Electric space thermostat shallbe furnishedby the unit manufacturer for installation by automatic controls contractor. H. Disconnect switch shallbe provided under ElectricalDocuments. 2.4 ELECTRIC INFRARED HEATERS A. Furnish andinstallheavydutyindustrialinfraredheaters with capacities as shown on the schedule. Unit shallbe ULListed. B. The fixture shall utilize rolled sheet, bright finished aluminum for allhousing and reflector material. C. The heat source shallbe Incaloy metal sheathed elements, suspendedin aheavyduty aluminum extrusion by all stainless steel support clips of one piece construction. D. Single element fixtures shallhave an extruded aluminum, heavy-duty stiffening channel running the length of the fixture, from which the factoryfurnished mounting brackets shallbe bolted. E. Multi-element fixtures shallhave suitable mounting support brackets furnished, that can be bolted in the field to slots in the rear of the extrusions. F. The terminalbox shallbe of either cast aluminum or fabricated sheet steel construction and shallbe gasket andULListedfor bothdust-tight and weather-proof application. High temperature pigtail wire leads rated at minimum 200degrees Celsius shall be provided and installedby the manufacturer. 2.5 ELECTRIC BASEBOARD A. Manufacturers: 1. Design Basis: Q-Mark 2. Model: QMKC B. Construction andAccessories: 1. 18gauge front cover andbrackets. 2. 120VThermostat or BMS thermostat 3. UL Listed. PART 3 – EXECUTION 3.1 GENERAL A. Locate units so clearance is providedfor: 1. Service and maintenance. 2. Enclosure removal. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  B. Level or pitch elements as required: 1. Install shims if necessary. C. Touch-upfinish after final adjustment. D. Replace damaged enclosures. E. Straighten bent fins. F. Replace damaged elements. END OF SECTION 23 8239 ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  SECTION 23 90 00 -PROJECT CLOSEOUT PART 1 – GENERAL WORK INCLUDED A. The contractor shall summarize anddocument adherence with the requirements of the specifications for project closeout including: 1. Copies of all warranties 2. Operation &Maintenance Manuals 3. Required tests 4. Test andbalance reports 5. Recorddrawings 6. Permit requirements 7. Valve taglist B. The contractor shall compile acloseout manual which shallinclude: 1. Alist of all required tests and aplace for signoff ofdate completed. 2. Alist of all submittals withdates of acceptance by the engineer. 3. Aschedule indicatingdates for beginning testing and startup of equipment anddates of tests to be witnessed by the engineer, or designated representative, as requiredby the specifications. 4. Test procedures to be usedfor life safety systems. 5. Project close out checklist. C. The final closeout manual shallinclude the following: 1. Test reports as requiredbythe specifications with signoffby the appropriate individual (engineer, architect, building official, etc.). 2. Documentation indicating all equipment is operatingproperly andis fully accessible for maintenance. 3. Copies of all warranties. 4. Test andBalance report. D. This section onlyincludes the requirements for documentation of the contract documents, by the contractor, for project completion. This section does not in any way decrease the scope of any of the drawings or specifications. E. If submitteddigitally, eachitem above shallbe separatedin adifferent file or digitalbookmark, per trade. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  SUBMITTALS A. Within 90days after notice to proceed submit apreliminary closeout manual with the following: 1. Alist of all required tests. 2. Preliminary schedule showing major milestones for completion of the mechanical systems. B. Within 30days of the first major milestone submit the completed closeout manual as described in Part 1. C. Within 2weeks of substantial completion submit acompleted “Project Closeout CheckList”, and the Final Closeout Manual. D. Listedbelow is achecklistfor use by the contractor. This list is not allinclusive for this project. Project Close-Out Summary – Mechanical . All required submittals have been submitted and either been approved or modifiedin accordance with the Engineer’s “make corrections noted” comments. . Clean filters installedin all units. (Installjust prior to building turnover) . All equipment has been started up andis functioning within manufacturers’ recommendations without any undue noise or vibration. (Submit alist of equipment with startupdates. Provide list at a point 65% into construction schedule). . All vibration isolation has been installed andis operating properly. . Duct access doors have been installed at fire andfire/smoke dampers and are properlyfire.stopped and fire andfire/smoke dampers have been visuallyinspected to confirm that they are open. . Access doors have been installed as required for concealed equipment, water hammer arrestors, valves, controls, actuators, etc. . Chemical treatment system installedper specification and functioning properly. . All equipment has been installed with the manufacturers recommended service clearances andis fully accessible for required maintenance. . All equipment and pipingis labeled per specifications. . Allpiping cleaned, flushed and testedper specifications. Submit all required test andbalance reports for record. . All action items are complete as listedin the action items reports. Submit alist of action items with sign offbyArchitect or Engineer for record. Punchlist to be completedprior to turn over of building. . Temperature control system complete and tested per specifications. . Test and balance complete and report submitted and accepted by Engineer. . Operation and maintenance manuals submitted with table of contents and requireddocumentation for extended warranties. . Factory Testing documented and submittedfor record. . Recorddrawings submittedper specifications. . Temperature Control record documents providedper specifications. . Temperature Control Point to point checkout documents submitted. . Temperature Control source code, passwords, device addresses, BACnet set-up parameters, and login information providedin hard copy anddigitalformat. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  PART 2 – PRODUCTS (Not Used) PART 3 – EXECUTION 3.1 EQUIPMENT STARTUP AND TESTING A. Prior to completion andpunchlist by the engineer, the contractor shall startup and test each piece of equipment as required by the specifications. The contractor shall provide documentation of all required tests with signoff of by the appropriate individual(engineer, architect, andbuilding official). 3.2 LIFE SAFETY SYSTEMS A. Alllife safety systems shallbe fully and successfully testedby the contractor before being witnessedby the engineer or building official B. The contractor shallprovide adetailed test procedure, withinstrumentation to be used, for approvalby the engineer and building official prior to any testing. C. Once testedby the contractor andfully operational, the systems shallbe demonstrated to the engineer. Once accepted by the engineer the system shallbe demonstrated to the building and fire officials. 3.3 COORDINATION WITH OTHERS A. The Division 21 through23 contractor shall coordinate his requirements with the General Contractor to ensure the other building systems are completed to the point that they will not adversely affect the operation of the Division 21 through 23 systems. ME Engineers  May 16, 2025  St. John’s University  006.3926.400  Issue for Permit  Basketball Training Facility  175-02 Union Turnpike  Jamaica, NY 11439  PUNCH LISTS A. The contractor shall submit in writing that the project is readyfor final review by the engineer. B. Once the project is readyfor final review the engineer will create apunchlist of any corrections or deficiencies. C. The contractor shall complete allpunchlist items andprovide aletter to the architect after completion stating all items have been completed or reasons why they were not completed. D. Upon receipt of this letter the engineer will verify that the punchlist has been satisfactorily completed. END OF SECTION 23 9000 