TABLE OF CONTENTS 00 00 10-1  SPECIFICATIONS GROUP – VOLUME I  General Requirements Subgroup  Division  Section Title  Date  DIVISION 01 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS  A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A  01 10 00 01 21 00 01 22 00 01 23 00 01 25 00 01 26 00 01 29 00 01 31 00 01 32 00 01 32 33 01 33 00 01 40 00 01 42 00 01 50 00 01 60 00 01 70 00 01 73 00 01 74 19 01 77 00 01 78 23 01 78 36 01 78 39 01 78 46 01 79 00  SUMMARY ALLOWANCES UNIT PRICES ALTERNATES SUBSTITUTION PROCEDURES CONTRACT MODIFICATION PROCEDURES PAYMENT PROCEDURES PROJECT MANAGEMENT AND COORDINATION CONSTRUCTION PROGRESS DOCUMENTATION PHOTOGRAPHIC DOCUMENTATION SUBMITTAL PROCEDURES QUALITY REQUIREMENTS REFERENCES TEMPORARY FACILITIES AND CONTROLS PRODUCT REQUIREMENTS EXECUTION AND CLOSEOUT REQUIREMENTS EXECUTION CONSTRUCTION WASTE MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL CLOSEOUT PROCEDURES OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE DATAWARRANTIES, GUARANTEES AND BONDS PROJECT RECORD DOCUMENTS EXTRA STOCK MATERIALS DEMONSTRATION AND TRAINING  01/16/25 01/16/25 01/16/25 01/16/25 01/16/25 01/16/25 01/16/25 01/16/25 01/16/25 01/16/25 01/16/25 01/16/25 01/16/25 01/16/25 01/16/25 01/16/25 01/16/25 01/16/25 01/16/25 01/16/25 01/16/25 01/16/25 01/16/25 01/16/25  Facility Construction Subgroup  Division  Section Title  Date  DIVISION 02 - EXISTING CONDITIONS  A  02 41 19  SELECTIVE DEMOLITION  01/16/25  DIVISION 03 - CONCRETE  n/a  DIVISION 04 - MASONRY  n/a  850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT - New York, NY STOREFRONT - ISSUED FOR BID WATERMAN PROPERTIES 31 January 2025 TABLE OF CONTENTS 00 00 10-2 DIVISION 05 - METALS n/a  DIVISION 06 - WOOD, PLASTICS, AND COMPOSITES n/a  EW EW  x  DIVISION 07 - THERMAL AND MOISTURE PROTECTION 07 27 00 VAPOR IMPERMEABLE AIR BARRIER SHEET MEMBRANE 07 92 00 JOINT SEALANTS  01/31/2501/31/25  EW EW EW EW  x x x  DIVISION 08 - OPENINGS 08 41 13 ALUMINUM FRAMED ENTRANCES AND STOREFRONTS 08 42 33 REVOLVING DOOR ENTRANCES 08 51 13 ALUMINUM AND GLASS WINDOWS 08 80 00 GLAZING  01/31/2501/31/2501/16/25 01/31/25  EW  DIVISION 09 - FINISHES 09 72 00 FAÇADE COATING  01/16/25  DIVISION 10 – SPECIALTIES n/a  DIVISION 11 - EQUIPMENT n/a  DIVISION 12 - FURNISHINGS n/a   DIVISION 13 – SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION n/a  DIVISION 14 - CONVEYING EQUIPMENT n/a  x o  INDICATES NEW SECTION ADDED AND DATE IN BOLD. INDICATES OUTLINE SPEC FOR DESIGN DEVELOPMENT ISSUE.  DATE IN BOLD INDICATES REVISION TO PREVIOUSLY ISSUED SECTION. REISSUED SPEC WITHOUT CHANGES. STRIKETHROUGH FONT INDICATES SECTION OMITTED  DATE DATEDATE DATE DATE  850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT - New York, NY STOREFRONT - ISSUED FOR BID WATERMAN PROPERTIES 31 January 2025 TABLE OF CONTENTS 00 00 10-3 LEGEND O OR A IA LD MEP S EW AC DTM FS O OR Owner Owner Representative Architecture Interior Design & FF&E Lighting Design MEP Systems Structural Exterior Wall  Acoustic Vertical Transportation Food Services Owner Owner Representative HPS Investment Partners Waterman Properties MdeAS Architects Vocon Partners Lighting Workshop Cosentini Associates Severud Associates Socotec Inc. Cerami & Associates DTM Friend of Chef HPS Investment Partners Waterman Properties END OF TABLE OF CONTENTS 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT - New York, NY STOREFRONT - ISSUED FOR BID WATERMAN PROPERTIES 31 January 2025 VAPOR IMPERMEABLE AIR BARRIER 072700-1 SECTION 072700 – VAPOR IMPERMEABLE AIR BARRIER PART 1 GENERAL 1.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS A. Work of this Section, as shown or specified, shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Contract Documents. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Work of this Section consists of Air Barrier Membranes, and includes but is not limited to the following: 1. Fluid or sheet applied, vapor impermeable air barrier membrane system located in the non-accessible part of the wall. 2. Materials and installation methods to bridge and seal air leakage pathways in roof and foundation junctions, window and door openings, control and expansion joints, masonry ties, piping and other penetrations through the wall assembly. B. Work of this Section includes all labor, materials, equipment, and services necessary to complete the air and vapor barrier membrane as shown on the drawings and/or specified herein, including, but not necessarily limited to, the following: C. Air vapor barrier applied over sheathing board, concrete curb, column, and slabs as well as CMU and all accessories including but not limited to sealants, sheet or liquid applied waterproofing for reinforcing meshes, as required or warranted by application condition. D. Materials and installation to bridge and seal the following air leakage pathways and gaps: 1. Connections of the walls to the roof. 2. Connections of the walls to the foundations. 3. Seismic and expansion joints. 4. Openings and penetrations of window frames, storefront, curtain wall. 5. Door frames. 6. Piping, conduit, duct and similar penetrations. 7. Masonry ties, screws, bolts and similar penetrations. 8. All other air leakage pathways in the building envelope. 1.3 SUBMITTALS A. Provide evidence to the Architect of licensing and certification under the Air Barrier Association of America's (ABAA's) Quality Assurance Program. B. Submit shop drawings showing locations and extent of air barrier and details of all typical conditions, intersections with other envelope systems and materials, membrane counter-flashings, and details showing how gaps in the construction will be bridged, how inside and outside corners are negotiated and how miscellaneous penetrations such as conduits, pipes electric boxes, and the like are sealed. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  VAPOR IMPERMEABLE AIR BARRIER 072700-2 1. Include details of interfaces with other materials that form part of air barrier. C. Submit manufacturer's product data sheets for each type of membrane, including manufacturer's printed instructions for evaluating, preparing, and treating a substrate, temperature and other limitations of installation conditions, technical data, and tested physical and performance properties. D. Submit manufacturer's data showing solids content of fluid applied membranes and coverage rates and wet film thickness upon application in order to achieve minimum dry film thickness required by this specification. E. Submit manufacturer's installation instructions. F. Submit certification by air and vapor barrier manufacturer that products  supplied comply with local regulations controlling use of volatile organic compounds (VOCs). G. Submit certification of compatibility by air/vapor barrier manufacturer, listing  all materials on the project that it connects to or that come in contact with it, including sealant as specified in Section 054000 for caulking joints between sheathing panels. H. Submit samples, 3 by 4 inch minimum size, of each air/vapor barrier material required  for Project. I. Test results of air permeability testing of primary air barrier material (ASTM E 2178-01) J. Test results of assembly in accordance with ASTM E 2357. PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. Provide air/water barrier constructed to perform as a continuous air/vapor barrier, and    as a liquid water drainage plane flashed to discharge to the exterior any incidental condensation or water penetration. Membrane shall accommodate movements of building materials by providing expansion and control joints as required, with accessory air seal materials at such locations, changes in substrate, and perimeter conditions. B. General: Air barrier shall be capable of performing as a continuous vapor-impermeable air barrier and as a liquid-water drainage plane flashed to discharge to the exterior incidental condensation or water penetration. Air barrier assemblies shall be capable of accommodating substrate movement and of sealing substrate expansion and control joints, construction material changes, and transitions at perimeter conditions without deterioration and air leakage exceeding specified limits. Provide a continuous air barrier capable of withstanding positive and negative combined design wind, fan and stack pressures on the envelope without damage or displacement, transferring loads to the structure, and not displacing adjacent materials under full load. C. Provide products with the following minimum properties: 1. Membrane Air Permeance: Not to exceed 0.00008 CFM/ft2 at 1.57 PSF when applied to CMU wall; tested per ASTM E2178. 2. Air-Barrier Assembly Air Leakage: Maximum 0.04 cfm/sq ft of surface area at 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  VAPOR IMPERMEABLE AIR BARRIER 072700-3 1.57 lbf/sq ft (0.2 L/s by sq m of surface area at 75 Pa), when tested according to ASTM E2357. 3. Membrane Vapor Permeance: Not more than 0.1 Perm; tested per ASTM E96, Method B. 4. UV Exposure Limit: Not more than one hundred fifty (150) calendar days; per ASTM D412 and ASTM E96, Method B. 5. Fire Testing: Air barrier system as a component of a wall assembly shall have been tested and passed NFPA 285. D. Connections to Adjacent Materials: Provide connections to adjacent materials at the following locations and show same on shop drawings: 1. Foundation and walls, including penetrations, ties and anchors. 2. Walls, windows, curtain walls, storefronts, louvers or doors. 3. Different wall assemblies, and fixed openings within those assemblies. 4. Wall and roof connections. 5. Floors over unconditioned space. 6. Walls, floor and roof across construction, control and expansion joints. 7. Walls, floors and roof to utility, pipe and duct penetrations. 8. Seismic and expansion joints. 9. All other leakage pathways in the building envelope. QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Installer Qualifications: 1. The air barrier contractor shall be, during the bidding period as well as for the duration of the installation, officially recognized as a Licensed Contractor by the Air Barrier Association of America (ABAA). The contractor shall carry liability insurance and bonding. 2. Each worker who is installing air barriers must be either a Certified Applicator or an installer who is registered with ABAA. 3. Each Lead Certified Applicator can supervise a maximum of  five  registered  installers. The Certified Applicator shall be thoroughly trained and experienced in  the installation of air barriers of the types being applied. Lead Certified Applicators shall perform or directly supervise all air/vapor barrier work on the project. B. Single-Source Responsibility: Obtain air/vapor barrier materials from a single manufacturer regularly engaged in manufacturing the product. C. Provide products which comply with all state and local regulations controlling use of volatile organic compounds (VOCs). D. Field and Lab Constructed Mock-Ups: Prior to installation of air/vapor barrier, apply air/vapor barrier as follows to verify details under shop drawing submittals and to demonstrate tie-ins with adjoining construction, and other termination conditions, as well as qualities of materials and execution: 1. Field: Construct typical exterior wall panel, 8 feet long by 8 feet wide (one of CMU and 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  VAPOR IMPERMEABLE AIR BARRIER 072700-4 one of sheathed areas, incorporating back-up wall,  cladding,  window  and  doorframe and sill, insulation, flashing, building corner condition, and typical penetrations and gaps; illustrating materials interface and seals. 2. Lab: See Architectural drawings for scope intent at masonry veneer wall E. Manufacturer shall be on-site at least once a week to observe installation and provide written report within 3 days. F. Manufacturer shall confirm all termination details and compatibility with materials being terminated to. G. Vertical and Lateral Fire Propagation Test Characteristics: The exterior wall assembly is required to comply with NFPA 285 “Standard Method of Test for the Evaluation of Flammability Characteristics of Exterior Nonload-bearing Wall Assemblies Containing Combustible Components.” The base wall, stud cavity insulation, wall sheathing, air barrier, continuous wall rigid insulation and exterior cladding are components that are required to be to be evaluated as part of  this  specific assembly test.  The  basis of  design product listed below is a component of the design test assembly selected by the Architect. 1.6 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Deliver materials to Project site in original packages with seals unbroken, labeled with manufacturer's name, product, date of manufacture, and directions for storage. B. Store materials in their original undamaged packages in a clean, dry, protected location and within temperature range required by air/vapor barrier manufacturer. Protect  stored materials from direct sunlight. C. Avoid spillage. Immediately notify Owner, Architect if spillage occurs and start clean up procedures. D. Clean spills and leave area as it was prior to spill. 1.7 WARRANTY A. System Warranty: Provide the manufacturer’s three (3) year system warranty, including the primary air/vapor barrier and installed accessory sealant and membrane materials which fail  to achieve air tight and watertight seal,  exhibit loss of  adhesion or cohesion, or do not cure. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.1 FLUID-APPLIED AIR AND VAPOR BARRIER A. Fluid-applied proprietary materials, minimum 40 mils dry thickness. Use regular or low-temperature formulation depending on site conditions, within temperature ranges specified by manufacturer. Provide related accessories including primer, seam tape, mastic, fluid and sealant recommended by manufacturer. Provide one of the following or equal: B. Basis-of-Design: GCP, Perm-A-Barrier NPL 10, or one of the following as acceptable 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  VAPOR IMPERMEABLE AIR BARRIER 072700-5 to the Architect: 1. Air Bloc 32MR by Henry Co 2. Barriseal R by Carlisle Coatings and Waterproofing. 3. ExoAir 120SP/R by Tremco, Inc. 2.2 SELF-ADHERING SHEET AIR BARRIER A. Modified Bituminous Sheet: 40-mil-thick, self-adhering sheet consisting of 36 mils of rubberized asphalt laminated to a 4-mil-thick, polyethylene film with release liner on adhesive side and formulated for application with primer that complies with VOC limits of authorities having jurisdiction. 1. Basis-of-Design: GCP, Perm-A-Barrier wall membrane, or an Architect Acceptable equivalent. 2. Carlisle Coatings & Waterproofing; CCW-705. 3. Henry Company; Blueskin SA. 4. Tremco, Inc.; ExoAir 110. 2.3 AUXILIARY MATERIALS A. General: Auxiliary materials recommended by air barrier manufacturer for intended use and compatible with air barrier membrane. Liquid-type auxiliary materials shall comply with VOC limits of authorities having jurisdiction. B. Wall Primer (for Use with Through-wall Flashing and Tapes Applied to Substrate): Liquid waterborne primer recommended for substrate by manufacturer of air barrier material. C. Flexible Membrane Wall Flashing: 0.8mm of self-adhesive rubberized asphalt integrally bonded to 0.2mm of cross-laminated, high-density polyethylene film to provide a minimum 1.0 mm thick membrane. Membrane shall be interleaved with disposable silicone-coated release paper until installed. D. Joint Reinforcing Strip: Air barrier manufacturer's approved tape. E. Transition Tape: 0.8mm of self-adhesive rubberized asphalt integrally bonded to 0.2mm of cross-laminated, high-density polyethylene film to provide a minimum 1.0mm thick membrane. Membrane shall be interleaved with disposable silicone-coated release paper until installed. F. Substrate Patching Membrane: Manufacturer's standard trowel-grade substrate filler. G. Sprayed Polyurethane Foam Sealant: One or two-component, foamed-in-place, polyurethane foam sealant, ; flame spread index of 25 or less according to ASTM E162; with primer and noncorrosive substrate cleaner recommended by foam sealant manufacturer. H. Joint Sealant: ASTM C920, single-component, neutral-curing silicone; Class 100/50 (low-modulus), Grade NS, Use NT related to exposure, and, as applicable to joint 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  VAPOR IMPERMEABLE AIR BARRIER 072700-6 substrates indicated, Use O. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.1 PROJECT CONDITIONS A. Environmental Limitations: 1. Apply air barrier within the range of ambient and substrate temperatures recommended by air barrier manufacturer. 2. Protect substrates from environmental conditions that affect performance of air barrier. 3. Do not apply air barrier to a wet substrate or during snow, rain, fog, or mist. 3.2 EXAMINATION A. Carefully examine installation areas with Installer present, for compliance with requirements affecting Work performance. 1. Verification of Conditions: Verify that field measurements, surfaces, substrates, structural support, utility connections, tolerances, levelness, plumbness, humidity, moisture content level, cleanliness and other conditions are as required by the manufacturer, and ready to receive Work. a. Verify that substrates are sound and free of oil, grease, dirt, excess mortar, or other contaminants. b. Verify that concrete has cured and aged for minimum time period recommended by air barrier manufacturer. c. Verify that concrete is visibly dry and free of moisture. Test for capillary moisture by plastic sheet method according to ASTM D4263. d. Verify that masonry joints are struck flush and completely filled with mortar. 2. Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected. 3.3 SURFACE PREPARATION A. Refer to manufacturer’s literature for requirements for preparation of substrates. 1. Surfaces shall be sound and free of voids, spalled areas, loose aggregate and sharp protrusions. 2. Remove contaminants such as grease, oil and wax from exposed surfaces. 3. Remove dust, dirt, loose stone and debris. 4. Use repair materials and methods that are acceptable to manufacturer of the fluid-applied air barrier system. B. Exterior sheathing panels: Ensure that the boards are sufficiently stabilized with corners and edges fastened with appropriate screws. 1. Pre-treat all board joints with 50mm to 75mm wide, manufacturer's recommended self-adhesive tape. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  VAPOR IMPERMEABLE AIR BARRIER 072700-7 2. Gaps greater than 6mm should be filled with mastic or caulk, allowing sufficient time to fully cure before application of the tape and fluid applied air barrier system. C. Masonry Substrates: Apply air and vapor barrier over concrete block and brick with smooth trowel-cut mortar joints, struck full and flush. 1. Fill all voids and holes, particularly in the mortar joints, with a lean mortar mix, non-shrinking grout or parge coat. D. Related Materials: Treat construction joints and install flashing as recommended by manufacturer. E. Clean, prepare, treat, and seal substrate according to manufacturer's written instructions. Provide clean, dust-free, and dry substrate for air barrier application. F. Mask off adjoining surfaces not covered by air barrier to prevent spillage and overspray affecting other construction. G. Remove grease, oil, bitumen, form-release agents, paints, curing compounds, and other penetrating contaminants or film-forming coatings from concrete. H. Remove fins, ridges, mortar, and other projections and fill honeycomb, aggregate pockets, holes, and other voids in concrete with substrate patching membrane. I. Remove excess mortar from masonry ties, shelf angles, and other obstructions. J. At changes in substrate plane, apply sealant or liquid bituthene membrane at sharp corners and edges to form a smooth transition from one plane to another. K. Cover gaps in substrate plane and form a smooth transition from one substrate plane to another with stainless-steel sheet mechanically fastened to structural framing to provide continuous support for air barrier. 3.4 JOINT TREATMENT A. Concrete and Masonry: Prepare, treat, rout, and fill joints and cracks in substrate according to ASTM C1193 and air barrier manufacturer's written instructions. Remove dust and dirt from joints and cracks complying with ASTM D4258 before coating surfaces. 1. Prime substrate as required. 3.5 LIQUID-APPLIED AIR BARRIER MEMBRANE INSTALLATION A. Apply air barrier membrane to achieve a continuous air barrier according to air barrier manufacturer's written instructions. B. Apply air barrier membrane within manufacturer's recommended application temperatureranges. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  VAPOR IMPERMEABLE AIR BARRIER 072700-8 C. Apply a continuous unbroken air barrier to substrates according to the following minimum thickness. Apply membrane in full contact around protrusions such as masonry ties. 1. Vapor-Impermeable Membrane Air Barrier: 70 mils wet film thickness, 40 mils dry film thickness. D. Do not cover air barrier until it has been tested and inspected by independent testing agency. E. Correct deficiencies in or remove air barrier that does not comply with requirements; repair substrates and reapply air barrier components. 3.6 SELF-ADHERED SHEET AIR BARRIER MEMBRANE INSTALLAITON A. Install modified bituminous sheets according to air barrier manufacturer's written instructions and according to recommendations in ASTM D 6135. B. When ambient and substrate temperatures range between 25 and 40 deg F, install self-adhering, modified bituminous air barrier sheets produced for low-temperature application. Do not use low-temperature sheets if ambient or substrate temperature is higher than 60 deg F. C. Corners: Prepare, prime, and treat inside and outside corners according to ASTM D 6135. 1. Install modified bituminous strips centered over vertical inside corners. Install 3/4.inch fillets of termination mastic on horizontal inside corners. D. Apply and firmly adhere modified bituminous sheets horizontally over area to receive air barrier sheets. Accurately align sheets and maintain a uniform 2-1/2-inch.minimum lap widths and end laps. Overlap and seal seams and stagger end laps to ensure airtight installation. E. Apply sheets in a shingled manner to shed water without interception by any exposed sheet edges. F. Roll sheets firmly to enhance adhesion to substrate. 3.7 TRANSITION STRIP INSTALLATION A. Install strips, transition strips, and auxiliary materials according to air barrier manufacturer's written instructions to form a seal with adjacent construction and maintain a continuous air barrier. 1. Coordinate the installation of air barrier with installation of roofing membrane and base flashing to ensure continuity of air barrier with roofing membrane. 2. Install strip on roofing membrane or base flashing so that a minimum of 75mm of 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  VAPOR IMPERMEABLE AIR BARRIER 072700-9 coverage is achieved over both substrates. 3. Install all flashings only after application of air barrier. B. Apply primer to substrates to receive transition tapes at required rate and allow to dry. Limit priming to areas that will be covered by transition tape in same day. Reprime areas exposed for more than twenty four (24) hours. 1. Prime glass-fiber-surfaced gypsum sheathing not covered with air membrane material with number of prime coats needed to achieve required bond, with adequate drying time between coats. C. Connect and seal exterior wall air barrier membrane continuously to roofing membrane air barrier, concrete below-grade structures, floor-to floor construction, exterior glazing and window systems, glazed curtain-wall systems, storefront systems, exterior louvers, exterior door framing, and other construction used in exterior wall openings, using accessory materials. D. At end of each working day, seal top edge of strips and transition strips to substrate with termination mastic. E. Apply joint sealants forming part of air barrier assembly within manufacturer's recommended application temperature ranges. Consult manufacturer when sealant cannot be applied within these temperature ranges. F. Wall Openings: Prime concealed perimeter frame surfaces of windows, curtain walls, storefronts, and doors. 1. Apply transition strip so that a minimum of 75mm of coverage is achieved over both substrates. 2. Maintain 75mm of full contact over firm bearing to perimeter frames with not less than 25mm of full contact. 3. Transition Strip: Roll firmly to enhance adhesion. G. Fill gaps in perimeter frame surfaces of windows, curtain walls, storefronts, and doors, and miscellaneous penetrations of air barrier membrane with foam sealant. H. Repair punctures, voids, and deficient lapped seams in strips and transition strips. Slit and flatten fishmouths and blisters. I. Patch with transition strips extending 150mm beyond repaired areas in strip direction 3.8 PROTECTING AND CLEANING A. Protect air/vapor barrier system from damage during application and remainder of construction period, according to manufacturer's written instructions. B. Clean spillage and soiling from adjacent construction using cleaning agents and procedures recommended by manufacturer of affected construction. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  VAPOR IMPERMEABLE AIR BARRIER 072700-10 C. Protect air/water barrier from exposure to the elements as required by  the  manufacturer. D. Remove any masking materials after installation. Clean any stains on materials that would be exposed in the completed work using procedures as recommended by manufacturer. 1. Schedule work to ensure that the air and vapor barrier system is covered as soon as possible after installation. Protect air and vapor barrier system from damage during subsequent operations. If the air and vapor barrier system cannot be permanently covered within 30 days after installation, apply temporary UV protection such as dark plastic sheet or tarpaulins. FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Inspection: Air barrier is subject to energy code compliance for visual inspections. Owner will engage Special Inspectors to perform inspections. Allow inspectors access to scaffolding and work areas as needed to perform tests and inspections. Retesting of materials that fail to comply with specified requirements shall be done at Contractor's expense. 1. Inspection by the Owners Agent shall not release Contractor of responsibility to perform quality control/quality assurance and comply with Contract Documents and Codes. 2. Forward written audit reports to the Architect within 10 working days of the inspection and test being performed. a. If the inspections reveal any defects, promptly remove and replace defective work at no additional cost to the Owner. 3. Air barriers will be considered defective if they do not pass tests and inspections. a. Apply additional air-barrier material, according to manufacturer's written instructions, where inspection results indicate insufficient thickness. b. Remove and replace deficient air-barrier components for retesting as specified above. 4. Repair damage to air barriers caused by testing; follow the manufacturer's written instructions. END OF SECTION 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  JOINT SEALANTS 079200-1 SECTION 079200 -JOINT SEALANTS PART 1 GENERAL 1.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS A. Work of this Section, as shown or specified, shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Contract Documents. B. Work shall comply with governing agencies having jurisdiction. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Work of this Section includes all labor, materials, equipment and services necessary to complete the joint sealers work as shown on the drawings and/or specified herein. B. This section includes but not necessarily limited to the following: 1. Fenestration and Glazing Perimeter Joint 2. Exterior wall joints. 3. Control and expansion joints in walls. 4. Joints at wall penetrations. 5. All other joints required to be sealed to provide a positive barrier against penetration of air and moisture. 1.3 REFERENCES A. All work shall comply with the codes and standards referenced below, unless a more stringent requirement is given in the specification.  The standards below are intended to be a benchmark, but should be exceeded where more stringent performance criteria are required by the Contract Documents or local governing agencies having jurisdiction. In the event of conflict, the most stringent requirements shall govern and be incorporated into the work.  The most recent codes and standards shall apply, unless otherwise noted: 1. ASTM C 510  Standard Test Method for Staining and Color Change of Single-or Multicomponent Joint Sealants 2. ASTM C 661 Standard Test Method for Indentation Hardness of Elastomeric Type Sealants by Means of Durometer 3. ASTM C 719 Standard Test Method for Adhesion and Cohesion of Elastomeric Joint Sealants Under Cycle Movement (Hockman Cycle) 4. ASTM C 794 Standard Test Method for Adhesion-in-Peel of Elastomeric Joint Sealants 5. ASTM C 920  Standard Specification for Elastomeric Joint Sealants 6. ASTM C 1087 Standard Test Method for Determining Compatibility of Liquid-Applied Sealants with Accessories Used in Structural Glazing Systems 7. ASTM C 1193  Standard Guide for Use of Joint Sealants 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  JOINT SEALANTS 079200-2 8. ASTM C 1248  Standard Test Method for Staining of Porous Substrate by Joint Sealants 9. ASTM C 1311  Standard Specification for Solvent Release Sealants 10. ASTM C 1330 Standard Specification for Cylindrical Sealant Backing for Use with Cold Liquid-Applied Sealants 11. ASTM D 412 Standard Test Methods for Vulcanized Rubber and Thermoplastic Elastomers – Tension 12. ASTM D 624  Standard Test Method for Tear Strength of Conventional Vulcanized Rubber and Thermoplastic Elastomers 13. ASTM D 2203  Standard Test Method for Staining from Sealants 14. ASTM D 2240  Standard Test Method for Rubber Property – Durometer Hardness 15. Sealant, Waterproofing, and Restoration Institute (SWRI) Validation Program 16. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 40 CFR 59, Subpart D – National Volatile Organic Compound Emission Standards for Architectural Coatings 1.4 PREINSTALLATION MEETINGS A. Prior to installation, Construction Manager shall arrange a meeting with the Architect, Owner, sealant manufacturer, sealant installer, and exterior wall consultant to discuss all aspects of installation.  Construction Manager is responsible for coordinating installation of joint sealants with cleaning of joint sealant substrates and other operations that may impact installation or finished joint sealant work. B. Preinstallation Conference: Conduct conference at Project site to comply with requirements of Division 1 Section “Project Meetings.” Review methods and procedures related to installation of joint sealants including, but not limited to, the following: 1. Inspect and discuss condition of substrate and other preparatory work performed by other trades. 2. Review and finalize construction schedule and verify availability of materials, Installer’s personnel, equipment, and facilities needed to make progress and avoid delays. 3. Review required inspecting, testing, and certifying procedures. 4. Review weather and forecasted weather conditions and procedures for coping with unfavorable conditions. 1.5 SUBMITTALS A. Bid submittals shall include, but not limited to, the following: 1. Sample Warranty. 2. List of similar projects completed and references. 3. Project Schedule from award to substantial completion, providing dates for project milestones. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  JOINT SEALANTS 079200-3 B. Submit Product Data for each type of joint sealant product specified, including, but not limited to, the following: 1. Sealant materials, indicating that material meets performance requirements and standards specified herein. 2. Backer rods. 3. Preparation and application instructions and recommendation. 4. Standard drawings illustrating manufacturer’s recommended sealant joint profiles and dimensions applicable to Project. C. Submit samples for the following: 1. Submit physical samples for color selection for each joint sealant type. 2. Submit physical samples for verification for each exterior joint product, for each color selected D. Submit Joint Sealant Schedule indicating joint sealant location, joint sealant type, manufacturer and product name, and color, for each application. Utilize joint sealant designations included in this Section. E. Submit Manufacturer and Sealant applicator’s qualifications as required by Section 1.6 specified herein. F. Submit statement of compliance with the Contract Documents including an itemized list of specification requirements and remedial detail requirements that are not embodied in the Contract, or intended Contract.  Identify specification page and paragraph, or remedial drawing, elevation, plan, section or detail for each item.  If there are no deviations, provide written statement of full compliance with remedial drawings and specifications. Failure to provide an itemized list of deviations or statement of full compliance shall be understood to mean full compliance and acceptance of specifications and remedial details. G. Preconstruction Manufacturer Laboratory Compatibility, Staining, and Adhesion Testing: Submit samples of each substrate or adjacent material that will be in contact with or affect joint sealants. Current manufacturer test data of products on matching substrates will be acceptable. 1. Adhesion: Use ASTM C 719 and ASTM C794 to determine requirements for joint preparation, including cleaning and priming. 2. Compatibility: Use ASTM C 1087 to determine materials forming joints and adjacent materials do not adversely affect sealant materials and do not affect sealant color. 3. Stain Testing: Use ASTM C 510, ASTM C1248, or ASTM D 2203 to verify non-staining characteristics of proposed sealants on specified substrates. No sealant work shall start until results of these tests have been submitted to the Architect and he has given his written approval to proceed with the work. H. Preconstruction Field-Adhesion Testing: Prior to installing joint sealants, field test adhesion to joint substrates using ASTM C 1193 Method A. Verify adhesion is adequate. Modify joint preparation recommendations for failed joints and re-test.  Submit written test report. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  JOINT SEALANTS 079200-4 I. Closeout Submittals: Submit, for Owner’s documentation. 1. Warranties:  Sample of unexecuted manufacturer and installer special warranties specified. 2. Maintenance Manual: Two (2) copies of an assembled and bound maintenance manual, describing the materials, devices, and procedures to be followed in cleaning and maintaining joint sealants. 1.6 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. All work of this section shall be single source responsibility. Provide joint sealants by a single manufacturer responsible for testing of Project substrates to verify compatibility and adhesion of joint sealants. B. Installer Qualifications: Engage an experienced installer to assume engineering responsibility and perform work of this Section who has specialized in installation and application of joint sealants required for this Project with record of successfully completion of projects of similar scope and who is acceptable to the manufacturer. Installer shall have minimum 10 years experience performing work of this section. C. Sealant Supplier: Company specializing in manufacture of products specified in this section with minimum 10 years of experience. D. Mockups: Install Field mock-up for approval by Architect and consultant. E. Random Field Test: Periodically test sealants, in place, for adhesion, using methods recommended by sealant manufacturer. Promptly replace any sealant that does not adhere, fails to cure, or fails to perform as specified by the sealant manufacturer. 1.7 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS A. Do not install primers or sealants when atmospheric temperature or joint surface temperatures are less than 40 deg. F or more than 80 deg. F, unless manufacturer submits written instructions permitting sealant use inside this temperature range. B. Do not install primers or sealants when surfaces are wet, damp, or have frost. C. Do not install primers or sealants when joints do not comply with requirements for joint configurations or sealant installation tolerances. D. Do not remove existing joint sealants unless replacement material is available for immediate replacement.  Do not leave open joints unprotected over night or during weather conditions that may be damaging to the building interior. 1.8 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Accept materials on site in manufacturer’s unopened original packaging. B. Store primers, sealant materials and equipment under conditions recommended by their manufacturer. C. Do not use materials stored for a period of time exceeding the maximum recommended shelf life of the material. D. Material shall be stored in unopened containers with manufacturer’s name, batch number and date when shelf life expires. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  JOINT SEALANTS 079200-5 E. Use all means necessary to protect the materials of this Section, before, during and after installation and to protect the installed work and materials of all other trades. 1.9 MANUFACTURER’S REPRESENTATIVE A. Contractor shall require representative of manufacturer of sealant materials to provide field instructions and periodic observation of the application and installation of primers and sealants. B. Contractor shall require the manufacturer’s representative to make sure that the subcontractor’s workmen are fully instructed and trained in the handling and application of all the materials, and shall see that materials are correctly installed. C. Upon completion of the installation, Contractor shall submit to the Architect in written form certification that the representative of sealant manufacturer has made periodic visits to the site to observe that in-progress installation of the work of this section and joint sealants are correctly installed. 1.10 SCHEDULING A. Schedule work so waterproofing, water repellents and preservative finishes are installed after sealants, unless sealant manufacturer approves otherwise in writing. B. Ensure sealants are cured before covering with other materials. C. Coordinate with requirements of other repair systems and materials.  Defer installation at obstructed areas, and install materials when obstructions are removed. 1.11 DESIGN RESPONSIBILITY A. Contract documents define design intent and performance requirements. Details show approximate dimensions, sealant joint profiles and locations.  The documents are being issued for bidding without complete detailing.  Contract is responsible for final design, field measurements and verification, certificates, permits, filing, and related documentation. 1.12 WARRANTIES A. General Warranty:  The special warranty specified in this Article shall not deprive the Owner of other rights the Owner may have under the provisions of the Contract Documents and shall be in addition to, and run concurrent with, other warranties made by the Contractor under requirements of the Contract Documents. B. Submit a written warranty executed by the sealant manufacturer agreeing to furnish joint sealants, to repair or replace those that demonstrate deterioration, staining or discoloration, or adhesive or cohesive failure under normal use within warranty period specified. 1. Warrant silicone sealants for a period of no less than 20 years from date of Substantial Completion PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.1 MANUFACTURERS A. Sealants:  Provide joint sealant products by one of the following, or approved equal: 1. Dow Corning 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  JOINT SEALANTS 079200-6 2. Momentive 3. Tremco 4. Sika 2.2 LOW VOC PRODUCT A. The VOC content of all products in this Section shall not exceed the VOC limits established in Section 018116, “VOC Limits for Adhesives, Sealants, Paints, and Coatings”, as applicable. 2.3 JOINT SEALANTS A. All joints, which are sealed with sealant as part of the fabrication or erection procedure, shall be sealed with low or medium modulus silicone (exposed or concealed) sealant in color to match the adjoining surfaces or as may be required by the Architect. All perimeter sealant (metal to adjacent construction) shall be low or medium modulus silicone sealant. B. In using specified sealants, strictly observe the printed instructions of sealant manufacturer regarding joint size, limitations, backer rod, mixing, cleaning, surface preparation, priming and application. A primer shall be used, unless printed instructions advise to the contrary, and sealant manufacturer certifies that the use thereof will reduce its performance. C. Care shall be exercised to insure against “Three Surface Adhesion.” Bond breakers, of polyethylene tape, shall be provided where necessary and where recommended by sealant manufacturer. D. Contractor shall provide certification from sealant manufacturer that the sealant manufacturer has reviewed all sealant details and finds same suitable for the purpose intended, compatible with and will not stain the surfaces with which they are in contact. Statement as to compatibility, adhesion sufficiency and non-staining shall be accompanied by actual test results on production substrates performed in accordance with applicable ASTM procedures. E. Provide non-staining sealants on porous joint substrates in conformance with ASTM C 1248 testing procedures. F. Sealants within the systems should be compatible and adhere to silicone. Provide sealant type recommended by sealant manufacturer for joint size and movement, to remain permanently elastic, non-shrinking, and non-migrating, conforming to AAMA 803.3. G. Provide joint sealants and accessory materials that are compatible with one another, and with adjacent materials, as demonstrated by sealant manufacturer in accordance with ASTM C 1087 testing procedures. H. Sealant should comply with ASTM C 920, Type S, grade NS, Class 50. I. Sealant back-up materials shall be polyethylene foam or extruded silicone as recommended by sealant manufacturer. Provide back-up materials that are non-staining, non-absorbent, compatible with sealant and primer, and of a resilient nature, 25 percent wider than joint width. Materials impregnated with oil, bitumen or similar materials shall not be used. J. Low Modulus: Tensile strength of 45 psi or less at 100 percent elongation when tested per ASTM D 412 after 14 days at 77 deg. F and 50 percent relative humidity. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  JOINT SEALANTS 079200-7 K. Medium Modulus: Tensile strength of not less than 45 nor more than 75 psi at 100 percent elongation when tested per ASTM D 412 after 14 days at 77 deg. F and 50 percent relative humidity. When tested per ASTM C 719 for adhesion and cohesion under maximum cyclic movement, to withstand 50 percent increase and decrease of joint width, as measured at time of application, and remain in compliance with other requirements of ASTM C 920. 2.4 MISCELLANEOUS MATERIALS A. Provide solvent, cleaning agents and other accessory materials as recommended by the sealant manufacturer. B. Materials shall be delivered to the job in sealed containers with manufacturer’s original labels attached. Materials shall be used per manufacturer’s printed instructions. C. Use masking tape to protect adjacent surfaces where required to provide a neat consistent finish. Use non-staining, non-absorbent type compatible with joint sealants and adjacent surfaces. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.1 EXAMINATION A. Examine the areas and conditions where joint sealers are to be installed, with Installer present, for compliance with requirements for installation tolerances and other conditions affecting performance of joint sealants.  Verify joint dimensions are adequate for development of sealant movement capability. Verify joint surfaces are clean, dry, and adequately cured. Notify the Architect and Owner in writing of conditions detrimental to the proper and timely completion of the work.  Do not proceed with installation until unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected. 3.2 INSTALLATION A. Comply with recommendations in ASTM C 1193 for use of joint sealants as applicable to materials, applications and conditions required by this Project where more stringent installation requirements are specified herein, such requirements shall govern. B. Sample Section of Sealant 1. During sealant installation work in exterior wall, the sealant manufacturer’s representative shall be on site, under whose supervision a section of the wall shall be completed for purposes of determining performance characteristics of sealant in joints. Architect shall be informed of time and place of such installation of control section. 2. Control section shall be installed according to specification given herein and shall not be considered as acceptable until written acceptance is provided by the Architect. 3. Accepted control section shall be standard to which all other sealant work must conform. C. Clean surfaces to be sealed.  Install backer, primers and sealant according to approved Shop Drawings, sealant test results and manufacturer’s recommendations.  Tool sealant after application.  Immediately remove masking.  Comply with requirements specified herein. D. Apply sealant under pressure with a hand or power actuated gun or other appropriate means. Gun shall have nozzle of proper size and provide sufficient pressure to completely fill joints as detailed. Neatly point or tool joint to provide the contour as indicated on the drawings. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  JOINT SEALANTS 079200-8 E. Preparation and Application: 1. Thoroughly clean all joints, removing all foreign matter such as dust, oil, grease, water, surface dirt and frost. Sealant must be applied to the base surface. Previously applied film must be entirely removed. 2. Stone, masonry and concrete surfaces to receive sealant shall be cleaned where necessary by grinding, water blast cleaning, mechanical abrading, or combination of these methods as required to provide a clean, sound base surface for sealant adhesion. a. Do not use any acid or other material which might stain surfaces. b. Remove laitance by grinding or mechanical abrading. c. Remove loose particles present or resulting from grinding, abrading, or blast cleaning by blowing out joints with compressed air, oil and water free, or vacuuming joints prior to application of primer or sealant. 3. Clean non-porous surfaces such as metal and glass chemically.  Remove protective coatings on metallic surfaces by solvent that leaves no residue and is compatible with sealant. Use solvent and wipe dry with clean, dry lint free paper towels. Do not allow solvent to air dry without wiping.  Clean joint areas protected with masking tape or strippable films as above after removal of tape film. 4. Do not seal joints until they are in compliance with drawings, or meet the control section standard. 5. Joint Size and Sealant Size: Joints to receive sealant shall be at least 1/4” wide.  In joint 1/4" to 3/8” wide, sealant shall be 1/4” deep. In joints wider than 3/8” and up to 1” wide, sealant depth shall be one half the joint width.  For joints wider than 1”, sealant depth shall be as recommended by the sealant manufacturer. Depth of joint is defined as distance from outside face of joint to closet point of the filler. 6. Primer:  Thoroughly clean joints and apply primer to all surfaces that will receive sealant. Apply primer on clean, dry surfaces, and prior to installation of joint backing. Completely wet both inner faces of the joint with primer. Mask adjacent surfaces of joint with non.staining masking tape prior to priming. 7. Joint Backing:  In joints where depth of joint exceeds required depth of sealant, install joint backing (after primer is dry) in joints to provide backing and proper joint shape for sealant. Proper shape for sealant is a very slight “hourglass” shape, with back and front face having slight concave curvature. Use special blunt T-shaped tool or roller to install joint backing to the proper and uniform depth required for the sealant. Joint backing shall be installed with approximately twenty-five (25) percent compressions. Do not stretch, twist, braid, puncture, or tear joint backing. Butt joint backing at intersections. 8. Bond Breaker: Install bond breaker smoothly over joint backing so that sealant adheres only to the sides of the joint and not backing. 9. Sealant Application:  Apply sealant in accordance with the manufacturer’s application manual and manufacturer’s instructions, using hand guns or pressure equipment, on clean, dry, properly prepared substrates, completely filling joints to eliminate air pockets and voids. Mask adjacent surfaces of joint with non-staining masking tape. Force sealant into 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  JOINT SEALANTS 079200-9 joint in front of the tip of the “caulking gun” (not pulled after it) and force sealant against sides to make uniform contact with sides of joint and to prevent entrapped air or pulling sealant off of sides.  Fill sealant space solid with sealant. 10. Tooling: Tool exposed joints to form smooth and uniform beds, with slightly concave surface conforming to joint configuration per Figure 5A in ASTM C 1193. Finishes joints shall be straight, uniform, smooth and neatly finished. Remove masking tape immediately after tooling of sealant and before sealant face starts to “skin” over. Neatly remove any excess sealant from adjacent surfaces of joint, leaving the work in a neat, clean condition. 11. Replace sealant which is damaged during construction process. 3.3 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Field Adhesion Testing of Non-structural Sealants:  Provide field-test of adhesion of joint-sealant to joint substrates. 1. Extent of Testing:  At a minimum, test completed elastomeric sealant joints as follows: a. Perform 10 tests for the first 1000 feet of joint length for each type of elastomeric sealant and joint substrate. b. Perform one test for each 1000 feet of joint length thereafter or one test per each floor per elevation. c. Record results in a field adhesion test log to be provided as requested. d. Additional testing as required to obtain sealant warranty. 2. Test Method: Test joint sealants according to method A, Field-Applied Sealant Joint Hand Pull Tab, in Appendix X1 in ASTM C 1193 or Method A, tail Procedure, in ASTM C 1521. a. For joints with dissimilar substrates, verify adhesion to each substrate separately; extend cut along one side, verifying adhesion to opposite side. Repeat procedure for opposite side. 3. Inspect tested joints and report on the following: a. Whether sealants filled joint cavities and are free of voids. b. Whether sealant dimensions and configurations comply with specified requirements. c. Whether sealants in joints connected to pulled-out portion failed to adhere to joint substrates or tore cohesively. Include data on pull distance used to test each kind of product and joint substrate.  Compare these results to determine if adhesion complies with sealant manufacturer’s field-adhesion hand-pull test criteria. 4. Record test results in a field-adhesion-test log. Include dates when sealants were installed, names of persons who installed sealants, test dates, test locations, whether joints were primed, adhesion results and percent elongations, sealant material, sealant configuration, and sealant dimensions. 5. Repair sealants pulled from test area by applying new sealants following same procedures used originally to seal joints.  Ensure that original sealant surfaces are clean and that new sealant contacts original sealant. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  JOINT SEALANTS 079200-10 B. Evaluation of Field-Adhesion-Test Results:  Sealants not evidencing adhesive failure from testing or noncompliance with other indicated requirements will be considered satisfactory. Remove sealants that fail to adhere to joint substrates during testing or to comply with other requirements.  Retest failed applications until test results prove sealants comply with indicated requirements. 3.4 PROTECTION A. Protect joint sealers during and after curing period from contact with contaminating substances or from damage resulting from construction operations or other causes so that they are without deterioration or damage at time of Substantial Completion. If, despite such protection, damage or deterioration occurs, cut out and remove damaged or deteriorated joint sealants immediately and reseal joints with new materials to produce joint sealant installations indistinguishable from original work. 3.5 CLEANING A. Clean off excess sealants or sealant smears as work progresses by methods and materials approved by manufacturers of joint sealants. Remove masking tape when no longer required. END OF SECTION 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-1 SECTION 084113 -ALUMINUM ENTRANCES & STOREFRONTS PART 1 GENERAL 1.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS A. Work of this Section, as shown or specified, shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Contract Documents. B. Work shall comply with governing agencies having jurisdiction. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Work of this Section includes all labor, materials, equipment, and services necessary to complete the engineering, detailing, fabrication and installation of the aluminum storefront as shown on the drawings and/or specified herein. B. This section includes but is not limited to the following: 1. Structurally glazed stick built aluminum storefront. 2. Spandrel glass with insulated back-pans. 3. Shadow boxes, ventilated and drained to the exterior, consisting of painted metal panel and insulated back-pans. 4. Louver assemblies with bird screen and insulated blank-offs. 5. Wall system (glass and frame) shall meet New York Office of Environmental Remediation requirements for acoustics. 6. Glass and glazing in conjunction with the work of this Section. 7. Aluminum and/or composite panels glazed within system. 8. Thermal insulation and vapor barrier as shown on the drawings or specified herein or required by Code. 9. All necessary steel or aluminum members where required to support, strengthen and/or reinforce aluminum members that are not specifically called out as structural steel on the structural or architectural drawings. 10. Sealants, caulking, joint fillers, gaskets, fasteners, vents and weeps, weep tubes, secondary drainage systems, bellows, closures, gutters, flashings, trim, as shown or as may be required in conjunction with the system or to join the system to adjacent construction. 11. Two continuous lines of sealant shall be used throughout. 12. Anchors with engineering and layout drawings. 13. Shop drawings, engineering calculations, erection drawings, samples, warranties and conformance test data. 14. Thermal modeling/condensation checks and system U-value calculations demonstrating compliance with performance requirements. 15. Safety glass where required by Code. 16. Protection and cleaning of finished work. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-2 17. Field measurements of adjacent and/or supporting construction and verification of existing conditions. 18. Preparation of “as-built” shop drawings reflecting all changes (from original “approved” shop drawings) that may have occurred during the course of the work. 1.3 REFERENCES A. All work shall comply with the codes and standards referenced below, unless a more stringent requirement is given in the specification. The standards referenced below are intended to be a benchmark, but should be exceeded where more stringent performance criteria are required by the Contract Documents or local governing agencies having jurisdiction. In the event of conflict, the most stringent requirements shall govern and be incorporated into the work. The most recent codes and standards shall apply, unless otherwise noted: 1. New York City Building Code 2. New York State Energy Conservation Construction Code 3. ASHRAE Standard 90.1 Energy Standard for Buildings Except Low Rise Residential Buildings 4. Aluminum Association Specifications for Aluminum Structures, Current Edition 5. Aluminum Association Aluminum Standards and Data, Current Edition 6. American Institute of Steel Construction (AISC) Steel Construction Manual, Current Edition 7. NAAMM "Metal Finishes Manual" 8. American Iron and Steel Institute (AISI) Cold-Formed Steel Design Manual, Current Edition 9. ASCE 7 Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures 10. ASCE 8 Specification for the Design of Cold-Formed Stainless Steel Structural Members, Current Edition 11. AAMA 2603 "Voluntary Specification, Performance Requirements and Test Procedures for Pigmented Organic Coatings on Extruded Aluminum and Panels" 12. AAMA 2605 Specification, Performance Requirements and Test Procedures for Superior Performing Organic Coatings on Aluminum Extrusions and Panels 13. AAMA CW-13 “Structural Sealant Glazing Systems” 14. ANSI Z97.1 for Safety Glazing Material Used in Buildings – Safety Performance Specifications and Methods of Test 15. ASTM A 193 Standard Specification for Alloy-Steel and Stainless Steel Bolting Materials for High Temperature Service 16. ASTM A 307 Specification for Carbon Steel Bolts and Studs, 60,000 psi Tensile Strength 17. ASTM B 209 Specification for Aluminum and Aluminum Alloy Sheet and Plate 18. ASTM B 211 Specification for Aluminum Alloy Bar, Rod, and Wire 19. ASTM B 221 Specification for Aluminum and Aluminum Alloy Extruded Bars, Rods, Wire, Shapes, and Tubes 20. ASTM C 719 Standard Test Method for Adhesion and Cohesion of Elastomeric Joint Sealants Under Cycle Movement 21. ASTM C 794 Test Method for Adhesion-in-Peel of Elastomeric Joint Sealants 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-3 22. ASTM C 1036 Specification for Flat Glass 23. ASTM C 1048 Specification for Heat Treated Flat Glass 24. ASTM C 1135 Test Method for Determining Tensile Adhesion Properties of Structural Sealants 25. ASTM C 1148 Standard Specification for Structural Silicone Sealants 26. ASTM C 1376 Standard Specification for Pyrolytic and Vacuum Deposition Coatings on Flat Glass 27. ASTM C 1401 Standard Guide for Structural Sealant Glazing 28. ASTM E 84 Standard Method of Test for Surface Burning Characteristic of Building Materials 29. ASTM E 90 Standard Test Method for Laboratory Measurement of Airborne Sound Transmission Loss of Building Partitions and Elements 30. ASTM E 283 Standard Test Method for Determining Rate of Air Leakage Through Exterior Windows, Curtain Walls, and Doors Under Specified Pressure Differences Across the Specimen 31. ASTM E 330 Standard Test Method for Structural Performance of Exterior Windows, Doors, and Curtain Walls by Uniform Static Air Pressure Difference 32. ASTM E 331 Standard Test Method for Water Penetration of Exterior Windows, Skylights, Doors, and Curtain Walls by Uniform Static Air Pressure Differences 33. ASTM E 1300 Specification for Determining Load Resistance of Glass in Buildings 34. Glass Association of North America (GANA) Glazing Manual, Current Edition 35. NFRC 100 -Procedure for Determining Fenestration Product U-factors 36. NFRC 200 -Procedure for Determining Fenestration Product Solar Heat Gain Coefficient and Visible Transmittance at Normal Incidence 37. Air Movement and Control Association, Inc. "AMCA Standard 500" 1.4 DELEGATED DESIGN A. The requirements for the curtain wall assemblies shown on the Contract Drawings establish basis dimensions, profiles, and sightlines. Within the limitations established by design intent as shown in drawings and specifications, the Contractor is responsible for the design and engineering of the entire system. The system must be capable of meeting all the specified performance requirements. Upon request, provide test data which indicates the system(s) meets the specified performance requirements. B. The design details do not cover all conditions which require solution. It is, however, intended that conditions not detailed shall be developed through the Contractor’s shop drawings to the same level of aesthetics and in compliance with performance criteria, as indicated for detailed areas and stipulated in these specifications. The Contractor, by accepting a contract for the work, acknowledges this and agrees that the Architect shall have final approval on design details. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-4 1.5 PREINSTALLATION MEETINGS A. Prior to installation of storefront, Construction Manager shall arrange a meeting with the Architect, Owner, storefront installer, and exterior wall consultant to discuss all aspects of the installation. Construction Manager is responsible for adjacent construction. 1.6 SUBMITTALS A. Submittals shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 1. Proposals should explain how the required OITC will be achieved. Include acoustic test reports by certified third party testing agency confirming system meets OITC requirements. If test report is not available, bidders shall include in their scope to have a certified testing agency perform testing in accordance with ASTM E 90 to confirm assembly meets the OITC rating per ASTM E 1332. Proposal shall clearly indicate locations where different strategies will be used where acoustic requirements are lower. Bidder shall provide information pertaining to proposed alternates or deviations to the documents. 2. Sample warranty. 3. Bidder’s take-offs for each wall type along with color highlighted elevations showing bidder’s scope. 4. Previous test reports performed within the last 3 years. 5. Names of all suppliers (glass, metal, paint, etc.) and installers and key personnel including the Engineer of Record who shall be State licensed Professional Engineer, to be provided at the time of bidding. 6. List of similar projects completed and references. 7. Statement of compliance with the design intent and commitment to comply with the Contract Documents. This shall include a line-by-line specification review noting any qualification or exclusion from the project specification. The bidder should provide information pertaining to proposed alternates or deviations to the documents. 8. Physical samples, data sheets, performance characteristics, color renderings and bid pricing specifically including all glass types and metal finishes. 9. Project Schedule from award to substantial completion, providing dates for project milestones, including visual mock-up drawings and viewing, performance mock-up drawings and testing, project shop drawings and structural calculations, procurement and production, installation, project completion. B. Submit Product Data for each product specified, including details of construction relative to materials, dimensions of individual components, profiles, and finishes. C. LEED Submittals 1. Refer to Section 01 81 13 “Sustainable Design Requirements” for detailed descriptions of the LEED submittal documents. 2. Provide a complete LEED Submittal Package for the LEED Focus Materials accordance with Section 01 81 13 “Sustainable Design Requirements”. 3. Refer to Section 00 62 31 “LEED Reporting Form”. Submit completed LRFs with the information applicable to this as indicated in Section 01 81 13 “Sustainable Design Requirements” of these Specifications. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-5 D. Shop Drawings: Submit Shop Drawings showing fabrication and installation of system including plans, elevations, sections, details of components, and attachments to other units of Work, indicating overall and detailed dimensions. Shop drawings shall be signed and sealed by a state licensed Professional Engineer. 1. Shop drawings should be coordinated to show surrounding work, including steel, concrete, masonry, flashing, seals, and anchorage, all correctly dimensioned. These should be promptly updated throughout the project as architectural drawings and shop drawings from other trades are updated. 2. Show details of all conditions for every member, joint, anchorage and glazing system. Show details of support system, method of attachment to building structure, anchorage details, reinforcement, and interface with adjacent work. Show location and detail of each anchorage. 3. Show all component locations and intersection details. Show method of isolating dissimilar materials. Show provisions for expansion and contraction. Show method of accommodating wind, seismic, dead load, and live load induced interstory differential vertical and horizontal movement. Show method of accommodating anticipated column shortening (due to loading) and creep in the concrete frame. Show how system accommodates construction and slab tolerances. 4. Show provisions for seismic drift, typically and at corners. Show method of drainage of the system including gutters, weeps and flashings. Show method of drainage of any condensation which might form external to the vapor barrier. 5. Clearly identify information required from other related trades in order to complete the work represented on the submission. Identify all dimensions and conditions requiring field verification. 6. Show joinery techniques and seals, provisions for horizontal and vertical expansion, drainage and weep systems, range of tolerances, glass and metal thicknesses, structural sealant bond widths and framing member profiles. 7. Identify all materials, including metal alloys, glass types, fasteners, sealant, and glazing materials, sizes, shapes, thickness and finishes. Tabulate these in a Materials Schedule included with the drawings. Identify all shop and field sealants by product name and call out on drawings. 8. Show dimensioned position of glass edge relative to metal rabbet. 9. Shop drawings of building elevations and floor plans shall be at a scale of 1/4" = 1'-0" or larger and wall sections/plan details at full scale. Glazing details shall be at full size scale. 10. Shop drawings shall fully demonstrate all requirements respecting the manufacture, finishing, handling, storage, carting sequence and erection of the units. Shop drawings shall be in addition to manufacturer's standard printed literature or previous test reports. 11. Make clear by obvious graphic device (bubble, cloud, circle) any and all deviations from the Contract Documents and revisions to shop drawings and submittals. 12. Make clear by obvious graphic device (bubble, cloud, circle) any and all modifications of the shop drawings relative to the previous submission. Revised drawings that lack such device shall be rejected. 13. Signed and sealed as-built drawings and calculations for Owner records. E. Calculations: Provide the following calculations signed and sealed by a State licensed Professional Engineer: 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-6 1. Submit structural calculations for frames, connections and panels. Submit engineering calculations to show that maximum deflections, including deflection of cantilevered elements, do not exceed the limitations specified herein. Indicate provisions for structural movement such as vertical inter story live load, horizontal inter story differential movement, vertical superimposed dead loads, creep and column shortening. Submit calculations of expansion and contraction for all elements. 2. Provide calculations for all anchors, inserts and fasteners demonstrating that they will sustain all imposed design loads. 3. Submit load-stress and thermal stress analysis for each type, size, and thickness of glass confirming proposed glass size and heat treatment is sufficient to withstand loads. Submit glass manufacturer's substantiating data. 4. Submit calculations for all applications of structural silicone sealant that indicate that stresses and safety factors in the proposed applications do not exceed those specified herein. F. Thermal performance and condensation resistance, including thermal models and U-value calculations performed in accordance with NFRC standards for project specific panel sizes. G. Test Reports: 1. Submit product test reports from a qualified independent testing agency evidencing compliance of system with requirements based on comprehensive. Submit the following: a. Air leakage and water infiltration testing. b. Structural performance testing. H. Submit plan reviews by structural sealant and glass manufacturer approving details are suitable for the use of their product. Include letter of acceptance of glazing details, thermal stress and load analysis review. I. Preconstruction Adhesion and Compatibility Test Report: From glazing sealant manufacturer indicating glazing sealants were tested for adhesion to glass and glazing channel substrates and for compatibility, non-staining, and non-migration with glass and other glazing materials. J. Submit samples for verification of each type of exposed finish required in manufacturer's standard sizes. Where finishes involve normal color and texture variations, include Sample sets showing the full range of variations expected. Additionally, submit three (3) each of the following: 1. 12" long samples of trim and formed panel with specified finish. 2. 12" x 12" samples of each specified finish. 3. 12" x 12" glass samples of each type, demonstrating anticipated distortion due to heat treatment. Provide multiple samples to show possible range. K. Closeout Submittals:  Submit, for Owner’s documentation. 1. Warranties: Special warranties specified. 2. Final as-built drawings and calculations, signed and sealed by a State licensed Professional Engineer. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-7 3. Maintenance Manual: Two (2) copies of an assembled and bound maintenance manual, describing the materials, devices, and procedures to be followed in cleaning and maintaining the exterior wall. Include manufacturer’s brochures describing the actual materials used in the Work, including metal alloys, finishes, glass, sealants, gaskets, and other major components. 1.7 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. All work of this section shall be single source responsibility. B. Single Source Responsibility for Glass: To ensure consistent quality of appearance and performance, provide materials produced by a single manufacturer or fabricator for each kind and condition of glass indicated and composed of primary glass obtained from a single source for each type and class required. All glass processes of fabrication including tempering, application of coatings shall be manufactured by single source or otherwise approved by the Architect. C. Manufacturer's Qualifications: Work shall be done by a manufacturer regularly engaged in the design and engineering, production, installation and glazing of storefronts. Workmen shall be skilled in fabrication and erection of high grade work. D. Aluminum Fabricator:  Company specializing in fabrication of architectural aluminum extrusions and sheet with minimum 10 years experience. Engineer who does structural design shall have a minimum 10 years experience designing architectural aluminum. E. Glass Supplier and Fabricator: Company specializing in manufacture of flat laminated glass and fabrication of architectural glass with minimum 10 years of experience. F. Gasket Supplier: Company specializing in manufacturer of products specified in this section with minimum 10 years of experience. G. Sealant Supplier: Company specializing in manufacture of products specified in this section with minimum 10 years of experience. H. Professional Engineer Qualifications: A professional engineer who is legally qualified to practice in New York State who is experienced in providing engineering services of the kind indicated. Engineering services are defined as those performed for installations of storefront systems that are similar to those indicated for this Project in material, design, and extent. I. Installer Qualifications: Engage an experienced installer to assume engineering responsibility and perform work of this Section who has specialized in installing storefront systems similar to those required for this Project and who is acceptable to manufacturer. Installer shall have minimum 10 years experience performing work of this section. 1. Engineering Responsibility:  Engage a qualified professional engineer to prepare or supervise the preparation of data for storefront systems, including drawings, testing program development, test-result interpretation, and comprehensive engineering analysis that shows systems' compliance with specified requirements. J. Insulating Glass Fabricator Qualifications: Fabricator of insulating glass units shall have a minimum of ten (10) years experience in fabricating units similar to those specified herein on Projects comparable to this project. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-8 K. Low-E Coating Producer: Producer of Low-E type coating shall have a minimum of ten (10) years experience in the production of Low-E type coating in quantities similar to quantities required for this project. L. Glazier Qualifications: Engage an experienced glazier who has completed glazing similar in material, design, and extent to that indicated for this Project and with a record of successful in-service performance. M. Ceramic Frit Producer: Fabricator of ceramic frit shall have a minimum of five (5) years experience In producing products comparable to that required for this project. N. Trade Contractor: 1. Shall furnish and install the items required for proper completion of the work without adjustment to the price. Work shall be structurally sound, quality construction and the Contractor shall be solely responsible for the inclusion of adequate labor and materials to cover the proper a timely installation of the items indicated, described or implied. This is a performance specification and criteria for the solution of structurally sound work as indicated on the drawings and herein specified for the sole purpose of defining the design intent and performance requirements. The details shown are intended to emphasize the acceptable performance requirements for this project, and the general orientation, arrangement and dimensional coordination necessary for the Contractor to fulfill its obligations as described within the executed contract. 2. Shall comply with project wind pressures. Reinforcement, if required, shall be within the mullions. Wind pressures act perpendicular to flat surfaces, regardless of surface orientation. Wind pressures act perpendicular to tangents of curved surfaces. At corners and other changes in plane both surfaces shall be assumed to experience inward pressure simultaneously. O. Contractor’s Engineering Responsibility: Engage a qualified professional engineer legally authorized to practice in the State of New York and experienced in providing engineering services of the kind indicated for exterior building enclosure systems similar to those required for this Project in material, design, and extent, and that have a record of successful in-service performance. This Professional Engineer shall prepare or supervise the preparation of data, including drawings, testing program development, test-result interpretation, and comprehensive engineering analysis that show the systems' compliance with the specified requirements. P. Framing Members 1. Glass, sealants and interior finishes shall not be assumed to contribute to framing member strength, stiffness or lateral stability. 2. Compression flanges of flexural members may be assumed to receive effective lateral bracing only from (a) anchors to building structure and (b) horizontal glazing rails or interior trim which contact the compression flange. Points of contra flexure shall not be regarded as lateral braces or as end points of any unbraced length; un-braced length shall be the distance between effective lateral braces. 3. Where a framing member reaction is resisted by a continuous element, maximum assumed effective length of resisting element shall be four times the bearing length, but not more than one-foot (305 mm). 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-9 4. Where framing member runs continuously past a deflecting support, combined deflection of member and support shall not exceed specified limits. Q. Sealant Adhesion, Compatibility and Stain Tests 1. Provide to sealant manufacturers sample of all substrates, which are in contract with sealant, regardless, or whether adhesion must be achieved. 2. For substrates, which must support adhesion, submit, for record only, sealant manufacturers’ reports of adhesion tests conducted in accordance with ASTM C 794, Test Method for Adhesion-in-Peel of Elastomeric Joint Sealants and ASTM C 1135, Standard Test Method for Determining Tensile Adhesion Properties of Structural Sealants. Report shall specifically acknowledge suitability for structural silicone application where applicable. 3. For substrates which are in contract with sealant, submit, for record only, sealant manufacturers’ reports of compatibility tests for sealants and primers conducted in accordance with ASTM C 1087. 4. For stone, concrete, masonry and other porous materials at perimeter seals, submit, for record only, sealant manufacturers’ reports of stain test performed in accordance with ASTM C 1248. R. Snap engaged components shall be secured against migration, and shall not serve any primary structural function, such as retention of glass or panels. Provide mechanical fastening of all exterior assemblies, not relying solely on compression, friction fit. Snap engaged plastic components are not permitted, except as nonstructural thermal improvement for interior trim. Joints in continuous snap covers and other continuous trim shall have splice sleeves of same material and finish as cover or trim. S. Storefront should be installed on top of stainless steel base flashing with an upturn leg at terrace setbacks. This work will need to be coordinated with the waterproofing details. The base flashing should be two-piece with drip edge and permit for future roof maintenance/replacement. T. Product Options:  Information on Drawings and in Specifications establishes requirements for system's aesthetic effects and performance characteristics.  Aesthetic effects are indicated by dimensions, arrangements, alignment, and profiles of components and assemblies as they relate to sightlines and relationships to one another and to adjoining construction. Performance characteristics are indicated by criteria subject to verification by one or more methods including preconstruction testing, field testing, or in-service performance. 1. Do not modify intended aesthetic effects, as judged solely by Architect, except with Architect's approval and only to the extent needed to comply with performance requirements. Where modifications are proposed, submit comprehensive explanatory data to Architect for review. U. Comply with The City of New York, State of New York and Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) 2010 requirements and other authorities having jurisdiction for proper fabrication and installation procedures. 1.8 PROJECT CONDITIONS A. Field Measurements: Verify dimensions of openings in construction work by field measurements before fabrication and show recorded measurements on Shop Drawings. Coordinate fabrication schedule with construction progress to avoid delaying the Work. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-10 1. Where field measurements cannot be made without delaying the Work, guarantee dimensions and proceed with fabrication without field measurements. Coordinate construction to ensure that actual dimensions correspond to guaranteed dimensions and satisfy project tolerances. 1.9 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Temporary protection should be provided immediately after storefront is installed and maintained until substantial completion. B. Leave-outs at hoists and other areas will be required. C. Keep water away from stored assemblies. D. Contractor shall be responsible for taking the steps necessary to protect the materials from careless handling of tools, weld splatter, acids, roofing tar, solvents, abrasive cleaners, construction dust and other items that could damage system components and finish during construction. E. Deliver, store and handle glass in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations; protected from weather, staining and damage. During storage and handling of glass provide cushions at edges to prevent impact damage. Protect glass from scratches and abrasion. Deliver glazing materials to Project site in manufacturers' unopened containers, fully identified with trade name, color, size, hardness, type, class, and grade. Store each item in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. 1.10 WARRANTIES A. General Warranty:  The special warranty specified in this Article shall not deprive the Owner of other rights the Owner may have under other provisions of the Contract Documents and shall be in addition to, and run concurrent with, other warranties made by the Contractor under requirements of the Contract Documents. B. Special Warranty: Submit a written warranty executed by the manufacturer and Contractor agreeing to repair or replace components of a storefront system that fail in materials or workmanship within the specified warranty period.  Failures include, but are not limited to, the following: 1. Structural failures including, but not limited to, excessive deflection. 2. Noise or vibration caused by thermal movements. 3. Failure of system to meet performance requirements. 4. Deterioration of metals, metal finishes, and other materials beyond normal weathering. 5. Chalking and fading of aluminum finishes. 6. Water leakage. 7. Cracking, peeling, or discoloration of low-E or reflective glass coating. 8. Glass failure including fogging of units and delamination. 9. Abnormal deterioration, aging or weathering. 10. Air leakage exceeding specified limits. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-11 11. Sealant, including structural silicone, ability to withstand loss of adhesion, loss of cohesion, cracking or discoloration. C. Warranty Period:  The work included in this Section shall be fully guaranteed for performance, materials, labor, and workmanship for a period of no less than 5 years from date of Substantial Completion (except as noted below). D. Special Finish Warranty: Standard form in which manufacturer agrees to repair finishes or replace aluminum that shows evidence of deterioration of factory-applied finishes within specified warranty period. 1. Warrant finishes for a period of 10 years against color fade, pitting, chipping, and film integrity. E. Insulated glass units shall be warranted for a period of 10 years. The warranty for the glass must include labor and material in the event of a “systemic failure”. Breakage due to spontaneous breakage / nickel sulfide inclusions, defective materials, delamination, seal failure, defects in or deterioration of low-e coatings or ceramic frit, breakage due to flaws, and manufacturing defects of the glass shall be included in warranty. Glass manufacturer shall issue a single source warranty for the entire insulated unit. F. Laminated glass shall be warranted for a period of 10 years. Furnish replacements for laminated glass, whether in insulating glass units or not, such as, but not limited to defects developed from normal use that are attributed to the manufacturing process and not to causes other than glass breakage and practices for maintaining and cleaning laminated glass contrary to manufacturer’s written instructions. Defects include edge separation or delamination and/or discoloration materially obstructing vision through glass, and blemishes exceeding those allowed by referenced laminated-glass standard. G. Sealants shall have a 20 year VIP material and labor warranty. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.1 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. Design: Design storefronts, including comprehensive engineering analysis by a qualified state license professional engineer, including, but not limited to story drift, twist, column shortening, long term creep, seismic, using performance requirements and design criteria indicated. Submit calculations for review by the architect, project structural engineer and consultants prior to fabrication. B. Performance and Testing:  Except as otherwise indicated, system shall comply with air infiltration tests, water resistance tests and applicable load tests specified. The most restrictive criteria shall apply. C. Testing: Where manufacturer’s standard storefronts comply with requirements and have been tested in accordance with specified tests in the last 3 years, provide certification with such tests for the record only. Provide certified test results to the Architect and Owner for information and record. All evaluation and test specimens shall be complete assemblies and represent project conditions including reinforcing, anchoring methods, panning and trim. Provide detail drawings associated with the submitted product and results. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-12 D. Air Leakage: Air leakage shall conform to the following requirements when tested in accordance with ASTM E 283. Differential static test pressure shall be 6.24 PSF. Air infiltration of fixed wall area shall not exceed 0.06 CFM per square foot. Air infiltration of doors shall not exceed 0.50 CFM per square foot of single doors, 1.00 CFM per square foot for doors hinged in pairs when tested at 1.567 PSF. E. Water Penetration under Static Pressure:  No evidence of water penetration at fixed areas when tested according to ASTM E 331 at a minimum static-air-pressure differential of 12 PSF. F. Design Wind Loads: Design wind loads will be determined from the wind tunnel study or ASCE 7 by governing building code. Primary aluminum members should not be less than 0.125” thick. Sills and miscellaneous trim (exterior) should be 0.125” thick minimum. Ornamental sections should be 0.125” thick minimum and reinforced as required to provide a uniform appearance. Overall frame depths should be kept to a minimum although structural performance should govern. G. Structural Test Performance:  Test according to ASTM E 330 as follows: 1. When tested at positive and negative wind-load design pressures, assemblies do not evidence deflection exceeding specified limits. 2. When tested at 150 percent of positive and negative wind-load design pressures, assemblies, including anchorage, do not evidence material failures, structural distress, disengagement and permanent deformation of main framing members exceeding 0.2 percent of span. 3. Test Durations: As required by design wind velocity, but not less than 10 seconds. 4. Glass Deflection: L/100 of short side or 1 inch maximum deflection at 100 percent of design pressure. If deflection cannot be met with designated glass sizes and thicknesses, notify the Architect and Façade consultant immediately for evaluation. 5. Deflection of panels, including copings and metal back pans shall be limited to L/120 under design wind and live loads. Aluminum sheet panels shall be 0.125” thick minimum. H. Structural Performance: Glazing shall withstand the following design loads within limits and under conditions indicated determined according to the governing building code and ASTM E 1300. 1. Design Wind Pressures. 2. Design Snow Loads. 3. Differential Shading: Design glass to resist thermal stresses induced by differential shading within individual glass lites. I. Deflection of Framing Members:  At 100% design wind pressure, as follows: 1. Deflection Normal to Wall Plane:  Net deflection for aluminum framing members supporting glass shall not exceeding L/175 or 3/4 inch, whichever is less. 2. Deflection Parallel to Glazing Plane:  Limited to L/360 of clear span or 1/8 inch, whichever is smaller. 3. Cantilever Deflection: Where framing members overhang an anchor point, limit deflection to two times the length of cantilevered member, divided by 175. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-13 J. Building Movement Accommodation: Accommodate design displacement of adjacent stories as follows and as specified by the EOR: a. Perimeter Live Load Deflection: L/360 at spandreal b. Wind load building drift: H/400 c. Seismic load inter-story drift: 0.025 x H d. At any floor, in-plane displacement shall be assumed to occur while floors immediately above and below remain stationary. There shall be no failure or gross permanent distortion of anchors, frames or glass, structural silicone shall not fail, gaskets and weather strips shall not disengage, weather seals shall not fail. K. Thermal Movements: System to meet the following requirements: a. Base engineering calculations on surface temperatures of materials due to both solar heat gain and nighttime sky heat loss. Allow for thermal movements resulting from the following maximum change (range) in exterior ambient and surface temperatures: b. Interior Ambient Temperature Change (Range): 70 deg F – 72 deg F. c. Exterior Ambient Surface Temperature Change (Range): -20 deg F to 180 deg F. d. Test Performance:  No buckling; stress on glass; sealant failure; opening of joints; component disengagement, excess stress on framing, anchors, and fasteners; other detrimental effects; or reduction of performance when tested according to AAMA 501.5. L. Condensation:  Contractor to demonstrate through thermal simulations and testing that no condensation shall occur on interior surfaces under the following conditions: 1. Conditions: a. 15 mph exterior wind speed. b. 0 degrees F outside temperature. c. 70 degrees F inside temperature. d. Interior film coefficient per NFRC 100. e. 30% relative humidity. 2. System shall be tested for condensation resistance according to AAMA 1503. M. Energy Performance: System to be thermally broken. Storefronts shall have certified and labeled energy performance ratings in accordance with NFRC. U-value and Solar Heat Gain Coefficient shall be coordinated with the Project Mechanical Engineer or Energy Modeler. Each type of building envelope construction shall be evaluated separately. a. Thermal Transmittance (U-factor):  Vision glazing and associated framing shall have U-factor of 0.36. Opaque areas, including associated framing, shall have a U-factor of 0.061for lightweight walls and U-0.099 for mass walls as determined according to NFRC 100. b. Solar Heat Gain Coefficient: Vision glazing shall have a solar heat gain coefficient of 0.36 as determined according to NFRC 200. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-14 N. Acoustic Performance: System shall attain a minimum acoustical performance of OITC-28 for the window (frame assembly and glass), as calculated in accordance with ASTM E-090 or ASTM E966. O. Tolerances in Building Structure: System should be capable of accommodating a minimum of +/-1 inch tolerance in the building structure. This tolerance is intended to account for placement of concrete and initial “deflection” that could occur prior to installation (short term movements). Project Structural Engineer to confirm expected concrete tolerances. These tolerances will be taken up within the anchorage system designed by the vendor. Additional floor-to-floor movements specified in this Section should be accommodated within the system. Assume steel erection tolerances no less than permitted by the American Institute of Steel Construction (AISC). 2.2 MANUFACTURERS A. Storefront:  Provide products by one of the following or approved equal. 1. YKK 2. Kawneer 3. EFCO 2.3 METALS A. Aluminum: Acceptable alloy and temper combinations for extrusions subject to fabrication, finish and structural requirements are: 6063-T5; 6063-T6; 6061-T6. Use 6063-T6 for extrusions receiving anodized finish. Other alloys of the 6xxx series and other tempers may be submitted for approval. Nominal wall thickness of 0.125 inch or greater is acceptable for primary aluminum member extrusions; wall thickness less than 0.125 inch (3.2 mm) may be acceptable and are subject to approval. Sills and ornamental sections (exterior) shall be 0.125” thick minimum. Overall frame depths shall be kept to a minimum although structural performance shall govern. B. Acceptable alloy and temper combinations for sheet and plate subject to fabrication, finish and structural requirements are: 3003-H14; 5005-H14. Use 5005-H14 for sheet and plate receiving anodized finish. Other alloys of the 3xxx, 5xxx and 6xxx series and other tempers may be submitted for approval. Provide 0.125-inch (3.2 mm) minimum nominal thickness or 4 mm (minimum). Extruded members and panels shall provide a uniform appearance. Reinforcement shall provide a uniform and flat outside appearance. Panel deflection under load shall be restricted to L/60. C. Alloy and temper recommended by manufacturer for strength, corrosion resistance, and type of use and finish indicated, complying with the requirements of standards indicated below. 1. Sheet and Plate: ASTM B 209. 2. Extruded Bars, Rods, Shapes, and Tubes: ASTM B 221. 3. Extruded Structural Pipe and Tubes: ASTM B 429. 4. Structural Profiles: ASTM A 1008. 5. Welding Rods and Bare Electrodes: AWS A5.10. D. Steel Reinforcement: Reinforcement shall be hot dip galvanized steel with 2.0 ounce zinc coating, complying with ASTM A 123 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-15 1. Structural Shapes, Plats, and Bars:  ASTM A 36. 2. Cold Rolled Sheet and Strip:  ASTM A 1008. 3. Hot Rolled Sheet and Strip:  ASTM A 1011. E. Trim: All exposed trim must be mechanically fastened with non-magnetic stainless steel fasteners and must be designed in a manner to avoid over stressing due to dynamic loading. Provide extruded aluminum ceiling trim at all interior spaces. Provide continuous trim within each room. Where required, butt together ends tightly. Miter ceiling trim at all corners. F. Galvanizing: ASTM A123 for galvanizing rolled, pressed and forged steel shapes, plates, bars, strip 1/8 inch thick and heavier and for assembled products. G. Galvanizing Repair Paint: Zinc rich paint for repairing galvanized surfaces and field welds in compliance with ASTM A780. Thickness of applied galvanizing repair paint shall be not less than coating thickness required by ASTM A123 or ASTM A153 as applicable. H. Dielectric Separator: Cold applied, asphalt emulsion type complying with ASTM D1187, non-sagging, resistant to severe corrosion conditions, applied in two coats for an overall minimum dry film thickness of 25 mils or heavy coating of epoxy paint in minimum 2.0 mil dry film thickness. I. Shop Painting for Ferrous Metal: Rust inhibitive primer compatible with finish coat of paint – provide one of the following or approved equal: 1. Hi-Build Epoxoline II Series N69/N69F (Tnemec Co. Inc) 4.0 – 6.0 mils d.f.t., 2. Carboguard 890 Series (Carboline Co.); 4.0 – 6.0 miles d.f.t., 3. Amercoat 383 H (Ameron Protective Coatings); 4.0 – 6.0 miles d.f.t. 2.4 FRAMING A. Framing Members: Extruded or formed aluminum framing members of thickness required and reinforced as required to support imposed loads. 1. Construction:  Thermally broken. 2. Glazing System:  Retained mechanically with gaskets on four sides or structurally glazed. B. Brackets and Reinforcements:  Manufacturer’s standard high strength aluminum with non.staining, non-ferrous shims for aligning system components. C. Fasteners and Accessories: Manufacturer’s standard corrosion resistant, non-staining, non-bleeding, non-magnetic stainless steel fasteners and accessories compatible with adjacent materials. 1. Use self-locking devices where fasteners are subject to loosening or turning out from thermal and structural movements, wind loads, or vibration. No liquid thread locks shall be permitted. 2. Reinforce members as required to receive fastener threads. 3. Where exposed fasteners have been approved, use countersunk Phillips screw heads, finished to match framing system. 4. All fasteners exposed to moisture shall be series 316 stainless steel. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-16 2.5 GLASS A. Refer to Project Specification 088000 2.6 GLAZING SYSTEM A. Glazing system shall consist of a dense gasket against one glass face, and a weather seal against the other glass face. B. Structural silicone system shall consist of structural silicone at interior glass face, and an exterior silicone weather seal. At glass edges not supported by structural silicone, provide gasket system; a recessed backer and silicone seal may replace either or both gaskets. 2.7 SETTING BLOCKS A. Provide setting blocks at the sill quarter points of all glass lites. Setting blocks shall be heat cured silicone rubber with a hardness of 80 to 90 durometer, Shore A, a minimum length of 4", and a minimum width, which will permit full support of both panes of glass in an insulating glass unit or a monolithic unit no matter how positioned within the glazing rabbet. Location of setting blocks at glass quarter points is acceptable. Distance from vertical glass edge to nearest edge of setting block shall not be less than six inches. B. Shims used in conjunction with setting blocks must be of the same materials, hardness, length and width as the setting blocks. C. Setting blocks and chairs shall be secured against migration. D. Where required provide side blocks within the upper half of both jambs of all glass lites.  Side blocks shall be heat cured silicone rubber with a 50 to 60 durometer, Shore A, or as recommended by the selected glass manufacturer. Provide 1/8" clearance between block and bearing surface. 2.8 GASKETS/WEATHERSTRIPPING A. All gaskets/weatherstripping shall be silicone or EPDM.  In contact with silicone sealants, gaskets and spacers shall be preformed heat cured silicone rubber, chemically compatible with the silicone sealant and suitable for the specific purpose intended or equal, as recommended by the sealant manufacturer and approved by the Architect. All gaskets/weatherstripping/spacers shall have continuous mechanical engagement to framing members; adhesive attachment is not acceptable.  All weatherstrips and gaskets shall be continuous with vulcanized/molded corners where possible. All weatherstrips and gaskets shall be non-shrinking, resistant to ultraviolet degradation, and replaceable. B. Sponge gaskets/weatherstripping/spacers shall be extruded silicone rubber with a hardness of 40 + 5 durometer Shore A and conform to ASTM C 509-79 (for neoprene). Sponge gaskets shall be compressed 20% to 35% in the final installed position. C. Dense gaskets/weatherstripping shall be silicone rubber with a hardness of 75 + 5 durometer Shore A for hollow profiles and 60 + 5 for solid profiles, and comply with ASTM C 864. D. Glazing gaskets, sealant backers within glazing pockets, and continuous glass spacer pads at structural silicone shall be heat cured silicone rubber conforming to ASTM C 1115, Type C. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-17 E. Silicone gaskets and sheet used to absorb movement at expansion joints shall conform to ASTM C1115, Type T. F. Gaskets that maintain glass face clearance while serving as a backer for a silicone weather seal may have a friction fit. All other gaskets and weatherstrips, including backers for structural silicone, shall have a continuous spline or a continuous groove that engages a matching groove or leg on the aluminum frame. G. Norton V2100 Thermalbond Tape is acceptable as a glass spacer pad when used in conjunction with structural silicone, subject to verification of compatibility. Glazing tapes shall be cap sealed with silicone sealant at all exposed conditions. 2.9 SEALANTS (NON-STRUCTURAL) A. All joints, which are sealed with sealant as part of the fabrication or erection procedure, shall be sealed with low modulus silicone (exposed or concealed) sealant in color to match the adjoining surfaces or as may be required by the Architect. All perimeter sealant (metal to adjacent construction) shall be low or medium modulus silicone sealant.  Silicone sealant shall be as manufactured by Momentive, Dow Corning, or Sika. B. In using specified sealants, strictly observe the printed instructions of sealant manufacturer regarding joint size, limitations, backer rod, mixing, cleaning, surface preparation, priming and application. A primer shall be used, unless printed instructions advise to the contrary, and sealant manufacturer certifies that the use thereof will reduce its performance. Sealant shall not be applied when substrates are wet or when the temperature is below 40 deg. F. C. Care shall be exercised to insure against "Three Surface Adhesion."  Bond breakers shall be provided where necessary. D. Contractor shall provide certification from sealant manufacturer that the sealant manufacturer has reviewed all sealant details and finds same suitable for the purpose intended, compatible with and will not stain the surfaces with which they are in contact. Statement as to compatibility, adhesion sufficiency and non-staining shall be accompanied by actual test results on production substrates performed in accordance with applicable ASTM procedures. E. Sealants within the systems should be compatible and adhere to silicone. Provide sealant type recommended by sealant manufacturer for joint size and movement, to remain permanently elastic, non-shrinking, and non-migrating, confirming to AAMA 803.3. F. The perimeter sealant, between system and adjacent material should be high-grade silicone. Manufacturer testing should be performed prior to construction including laboratory testing to confirm adhesion, compatibility and stain resistance. Sealant should comply with ASTM C 920, Type S, grade NS, Class 25. G. Sealant back-up materials shall be polyethylene foam or extruded silicone as recommended by sealant manufacturer. Back-up shall not absorb water. 2.10 SEALANTS (STRUCTURAL) A. All components which are adhered with a two part structural silicone sealant as part of the fabrication, glazing or erection procedure, shall be sealed/ with an approved structural silicone, as manufactured by Momentive, Dow Corning, or Sika and approved by the Architect.  All 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-18 glazing with structural silicone sealant shall be accomplished in a shop wherever consistent with the design. B. The minimum silicone joint thickness shall be 1/4 inch. C. In using specified sealants, strictly observe the printed instructions of sealant manufacturer regarding joint size, limitations, backer rod, mixing, cleaning, surface preparation, priming and application. A primer shall be used, unless printed instructions advise to the contrary.  Sealant shall not be applied when substrates are wet or when the temperature is below 40 deg. F. Units shall not be moved until structural silicone seal has achieved full cure. D. Care shall be exercised to insure against "Three Surface Adhesion."  Bond breakers shall be provided where necessary. E. Contractor shall provide certification from sealant manufacturer that the sealant manufacturer has reviewed all sealant details and tested all contact surfaces, and finds same suitable for use with proposed sealant, the purpose intended and compatible with the surfaces with which they are in contact.  Sealant manufacturer's certification shall include the following based upon tests performed on production run materials: 1. Test data of adhesion to production samples of metal and glass, tested in accordance with ASTM C 794. 2. Compatibility statement that the materials in contact with the sealant such as gaskets, spacers, setting blocks, are compatible with the sealant after 21 days exposure to ultra violet, 2000 -4000 (micro watt UV radiation). 3. Stress statement that when exposed to the specified wind load the stress in the silicone sealant of dimensions shown does not exceed 20 psi with a safety factor of 5:1. F. Structural silicone shall not support dead load. Structural silicone shall be free of entrained air and shall have full contact with substrates per GANA standards. G. Structural silicone shall not be applied to edges of insulating glass or to edges of laminated glass. H. Glass or other infill material shall not be attached by structural silicone on both sides of a frame movement joint. I. Where silicone bonds to a metal or glass surface, the weakest element in the line of stress must have a minimum strength of 120 psi.  For each combination of substrates submit report from an independent laboratory for tests performed in the following manner: 1. Assemble and fully cure a minimum of 6 samples using actual substrates and a minimum sample length of 5". 2. Subject sample to a tensile load such that nominal stress on silicone is 20 psi, hold for one minute and remove load.  Repeat for additional loadings, increasing nominal silicone stress by 20 psi with each successive loading. Continue until failure occurs or until 200 psi is successfully applied. 3. All 6 samples must successfully withstand at least 120 psi. Report maximum stress and mode of failure. If one or more samples do not meet this criteria, revise failed element and repeat tests with 6 new samples.  Repeat until all 6 samples are successfully tested. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-19 4. Testing shall be performed in such a manner as to establish stress and safety factor over the temperature range described herein. 5. Prepare an outline for a quality assurance program for evaluation of adhesion and other physical attributes of sealants and submit to Architect for review and approval. 6. Program shall cover both initial testing of components for sealant adhesion/compatibility, etc., and also random testing of production run materials, etc.  Include testing at full negative design pressure, one unit per one hundred units manufactured for the project. Also include methods which will be employed to monitor sealant application to insure full sealant contact.  No sealant work shall be performed prior to approval of program. 7. Submit QA/QC plan for structural silicone glazing prior to start of production. 2.11 ANCHORS IN CONCRETE AND MASONRY A. Anchors: Three way adjustable anchors that accommodate fabrication and installation tolerances in material and finish compatible with adjoining materials and recommended by manufacturer. 1. Concrete and Masonry Inserts:  Anchors embedded in concrete and masonry shall be hot dip galvanized rolled steel, or hot dip galvanized cold formed steel complying with ASTM A 123/A, 123M or ASTM A 153/A 153M requirements. B. Expansion Shields and Bolts: To be Hilti, Powers, or approved equal. Expansion anchors installed in hardened concrete shall be designed in accordance with Appendix D of ACI 318 as modified by 2014 NYC BC Sections 1908.1.9 and 1908.1.10, provided that they are within the scope of Appendix D. Post-installed expansion anchors shall be tested and qualified according to ACI 355.2. 2.12 FASTENERS A. Do not use exposed fasteners except where unavoidable for application of hardware. Match finish of adjoining metal. B. Fasteners requirements are applicable to screws, bolts, nuts, washers, rivets and pins. C. Fasteners outboard of or within a glazing pocket, gutter, flashed cavity or other wet location shall be stainless steel type 316. D. Self-drilling, self-threading screws are not acceptable. Screw in plugs and power-actuated fasteners are not acceptable. 2.13 SHIMS A. Shimming will be limited to allowed engineering requirements, and must not interfere with perimeter caulking. B. Slip Joint Linings/Sleeves:  Provide stainless steel sleeve spacers and/or suitable bearing pads, as required, to insure free movement between surfaces where expansion and deflection movements are intended. Provide "Eel Slip," "Nylatron" or high impact polystyrene shims or pads or equivalent plastic units of sizes and thicknesses (minimum 1/16" except 1/8" for "Eel Slip") recommended by the manufacturer to permanently prevent "freeze up" of joints.  All sleeves, spacers, bracing pads and shims must be incombustible and rated by UL. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-20 C. Shims which transfer shear forces shall be steel plates and fillet welded to each other and to adjacent steel surfaces. Shims and welds shall be structurally designed to support applied loads. D. Plastic shims are acceptable at static connections for which shims transfer only compressive forces. E. Wood shims are not acceptable. 2.14 INSULATION A. Insulation used must comply with the Building Code. B. Provide thermal insulation where shown and where required. Use U.S. Gypsum Thermafiber insulation or approved equal to meet specified thermal performance. Where shown on the Drawings, provide foil vapor barrier (permeability not to exceed 0.020 Perms) at interior surface and all seams and edges. Provide insulation at mullions and/or stiffeners as required to meet overall thermal and condensation resistance requirements and as required by Code. C. Tape and seal all joints in vapor barrier and along edges and supports to insure continuous vapor barrier. D. Apply insulation utilizing welded or screw applied impaling pins and retaining clips. Adhesive attachment will not be accepted. E. Insulation shall be suitably isolated/separated from direct contact with spandrel glass. Provide a minimum 1 inch air space and straps or clips to prevent insulation from dislodging during transport. F. Provide galvanized back pan where shown on the Drawings. 2.15 ALUMINUM FINISHES A. Superior Performance Organic Finish: (AA-C12C40R1x, chemical finish: acid chromate fluoride phosphate conversion coating)  Exterior painted aluminum fluoropolymer coating finish shall be factory oven cured, 3 coat 70% PVDF (Kynar) such as PPG Duranar complying with AAMA 2605. Color as selected by the architect. A licensed formulator shall supply paint. B. Powder coating: One coat dry system with 70% fluoropolymer resin, complying with AAMA 2605. 1. Dry film thickness, ASTM D7091:  As required to meet specified performance requirements and as recommended by manufacturer for application, but not less than 1.2 mils. 2. Dry film Hardness, ASTM D3363:  2H. C. Anodized Finish: 1. AA-M10C22A41 (for Clear Anodized):  Mechanical Finish: non-specular as fabricated; chemical finish: etched, medium matte; Anodic coating: Architectural Class I. 2. Complying with AAMA 611 “Voluntary Standards for Anodized Architectural Aluminum”. 3. Minimum coating thickness of 1.2 mils. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-21 4. Color variation not to exceed a delta E of 3. The anodic finish shall be within these limits and from the range of samples approved by the Architect. D. Baked Enamel Finish:  (AA-C12C42R1x, chemical finish: acid chromate fluoride phosphate conversion coating)  Interior painted aluminum finish shall be factory oven cured, baked acrylic, such as PPG Duracron complying with AAMA 2603. Color as selected by the Architect. A licensed formulator shall supply paint. E. Color shall match approved samples. Samples shall show extremes of color range. Vendors to advise if finishes are subject to directionality. Orientation shall be the same for all components. F. Mill finish is not acceptable at wet surfaces. G. Aluminum surface to which structural silicone will be adhered shall have a finish, which demonstrates by test the ability to satisfy specified requirements. Subject to testing, acceptable finishes are as follows: 1. Architectural Class I anodizing conforming to AAMA 611. 2. Pretreatment of metal surfaces shall be done in accordance with procedures recommended by formulator. 3. Pigmented organic coatings for extrusions, structural shapes, sheet or plate, spray applied in the factory, shall meet requirements of AAMA 2605. 4. Field touch-up of painted aluminum is permitted only with written permission from the Architect. Unless touch-up is authorized, replace damaged material with new material. 5. Over life of warranty, paint film shall not crack or peel during specified special warranty period. 2.16 ENTRANCE DOORS A. Aluminum entrance doors shall be narrow stile factory-glazed aluminum doors. B. Product: CRL narrowstile glass doors or approved equal. C. Aluminum entrance doors shall be stile and rail type swing doors. Aluminum shall be extruded aluminum conforming to ASTM B 221, 0.125” thick for door stiles and 0.050” thick for glazing molding. 1. Sections shall be of sizes and profiles indicated; shall present straight, sharply defined lines and arises; and shall be free from defects impairing strength, durability and appearance. 2. Exposed fasteners shall be 300 grade stainless steel. D. Each door shall be factory glazed set in neoprene glazing gasket, refer to Section 2.6 of this specification and Section 088000 for glass. E. Doors shall meet the following resistance to corner racking when tested by the Dual Moment Load Test: 1. Test section shall consist of a standard top door corner assembly. Side rail section shall be 24” long and top rail section shall be 12” long. 2. Anchor “top rail” positively to test bench so that corner protrudes 3” beyond bench edge. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY ISSUED FOR BID WATERMAN PROPERTIES STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT 28 January 2025 ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-22 3. Anchor a lever arm positively to “side rail” at a point 19” from inside edge of “top rail”, attach weight support pad at a point 19” from inner edge of “side rail”. 4. Test section shall withstand a load of 235 lbs. on the lever arm before reaching the point of failure, which shall be considered a rotation of the lever arm in excess of 45 degrees. F. Air Infiltration: Per “Performance Requirements” section of this specification. G. Door bottom rail of exterior doors shall have an EPDM blade gasket sweep strip applied with concealed fasteners. H. Corner construction shall consist of mechanical clip fastening, SIGMA deep penetration and fillet welds. Glazing stops shall be hook-in type with EPDM glazing gaskets. I. The door weatherstripping on a single acting offset pivot or butt hung exterior door and frame (single or pairs) shall be thermoplastic elastomer weathering on a tubular shape with a semi-rigid polymeric backing. J. The door weatherstripping on a double acting, center pivoted door and frame (single or double) shall be pile cloth. The door bottom rail shall be weathered with an EPDM blade gasket sweep strip applied with concealed fasteners. K. The meeting stiles on pairs of doors shall be equipped with an adjustable astragal. L. Doors shall comply with ADA requirements. Provide ADA thresholds and hardware that also meet Accessibility requirements. M. Provide continuous weather stripping. Detail door and the surrounding system to flash water away from the door. 2.17 LOUVERS A. For louvers glazed into the system, louvers shall be AMCA rated and storm proof. B. Provide insulated blank off panels consisting of galvanized or aluminum 0.125 inch sheet with mineral wool insulation. 2.18 MISCELLANEOUS MATERIALS A. Provide straps, plates and brackets, built-in inserts, as required for support and anchorage of the fabricated items to adjacent surfaces. B. Where steel reinforcement of units is required for strength or other unavoidable necessity and concealed within (encased) in aluminum sections or employed in potentially wetted areas, hot dip galvanize the pieces after fabrication with 2.0 ounce zinc coating, complying with ASTM A 123. All other steel reinforcement shall be coated with two (2) heavy coats of zinc rich primer in differing colors. C. Flashing required within the system shall be 26 ga. stainless steel. D. Flashing required to join the system to adjacent construction shall be 26 ga. stainless steel. E. Insulated Aluminum Panels:  Manufacturer's standard laminated aluminum faced panels of 1" thickness. Panel shall be flat, with no deviation in any direction exceeding 1/16” in 2’, or 1/8” 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-23 for the entire panel. Panel shall be tested and comply with NFPA 285 and ASTM E84 acceptance criteria. 1. Face Sheets:  Not less than 0.0249” thick and finished to match framing, color selected by Architect. 2. Concealed Back Sheets: Aluminum or galvanized steel. 3. Stabilizer Sheets:  1/8” thick tempered hardboard. 4. Core Material:  Rigid close cell polyisocyanurate (fire rated core). 5. Edge Condition: Prepared for glazing into framing and either sealed or vented to the exterior only. F. Aluminum Panels: Minimum 1/8 inch thick aluminum finished to match. Provide stiffeners to prevent bowing or oil canning. Panel shall be flat, with no deviation in any direction exceeding 1/16” in 2’, or 1/8” for the entire panel. 1. Face Sheets: Not less than 1/8” thick and finished to match, color selected by Architect. 2. Concealed Back Sheets: Aluminum or galvanized steel. 3. Stabilizer Sheets:  1/8” thick tempered hardboard. 4. Insulating Material:  Mineral wool insulation. 5. Edge Condition: Prepared for glazing into framing and either sealed or vented to the exterior only. G. Aluminum Composite Panels:  Alucobond or approved equal. 1. Composition: Two sheets of aluminum sandwiching a solid fire resistive core of extruded thermoplastic material formed in a continuous process with no glues or adhesives between dissimilar materials. The core material shall be free of voids and/or air spaces and not contain foamed insulation material. Products laminated sheet by sheet in a batch process using glues or adhesives between materials shall not be acceptable. a. Fire-Retardant Core: Noncombustible, with the following surface-burning characteristics as determined by testing identical products per ASTM E 84 by UL or another testing and inspecting agency acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction: 1). Flame-Spread Index: 25 or less. 2). Smoke-Developed Index: 450 or less. 2. Panel Dimensions: Field fabrication shall be allowed where necessary, but shall be kept to an absolute minimum. All fabrication shall be done under controlled shop conditions when possible. 3. Panel lines, breaks, and angles shall be sharp, true, and surfaces free from warp and buckle. Stiffen as required. 4. Maximum deviation from panel flatness shall be 1/8” in 5’-0” on panel in any direction for assembled units, Maximum 0.8% of any 72” panel dimension-(Non-accumulative – No Oil Canning). 5. Bond Integrity: When tested for bond integrity, in accordance with ASTM  D 1781 (simulating resistance to panel delamination), there shall be no adhesive failure of the bond a)between the core and the skin nor b) cohesive failure of the core itself below the following values: 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-24 a. Peel Strength: 22.5 in lb/in as manufactured. b. 22.5 in lb/in after 21 days soaking in water at 70 deg. F. 6. Finish:  Comply with Section 084400-2.20. 2.19 FABRICATION A. General: Fabricate system according to Shop Drawings. Fabricate components that, when assembled, will have accurately fitted joints with ends coped or mitered to produce hairline joints free of burrs and distortion. After fabrication, clearly mark components to identify their locations in Project according to Shop Drawings. B. Provide manufacturer's standard fabrication and accessories which comply with indicated standards and are reglazable without dismantling of sash framing, except to extent more specific or more stringent requirements are indicated. Include complete system for assembly of components and anchorage of units, and prepare sash for glazing. Units shall be machined, mechanically fastened, and sealed to form a watertight joint. C. Corner construction shall be executed so that exposed butt and hairline joints shall be straight, true, flat, and aligned with no two planes out of alignment by more than 1/64" with mechanical and welded attachments. D. Slab cover, copings, and trim shall be shop fabricated and welded at corners, spliced on straight run. E. System shall be able to accommodate all fabrication tolerances. F. Forming: Form shapes with sharp profiles, straight and free of defects or deformations, before finishing. G. Prepare components to receive concealed fasteners and anchor and connection devices. H. Fabricate components to drain water passing joints, condensation occurring in glazing channels, condensation occurring within framing members, and moisture migrating within the system to the exterior. I. Glazing Pockets: Provide minimum clearances for thickness and type of glass indicated according to GANA's "Glazing Manual." Ensure edge and face clearance between glass and metal of minimum 1/4 inch. J. Metal Protection: Where aluminum will contact dissimilar metals, protect against galvanic action by painting contact surfaces with zinc chromate primer or by applying sealant or tape recommended by manufacturer for this purpose. Where aluminum will contact concrete or masonry, protect against corrosion by painting contact surfaces with bituminous paint or using shims. K. Frame Units: Factory assemble frame units according to Shop Drawings to greatest extent possible.  Rigidly secure non-movement joints.  Seal joints watertight, unless otherwise indicated.  Assemble components to drain water passing joints, condensation occurring in glazing channels, condensation occurring within framing members, and moisture migrating within the system to the exterior. 1. Install glazing according to approved Shop Drawings. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-25 L. All machining, cutting and welding shall be done before finish is applied. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.1 EXAMINATION A. Examine areas, surfaces, and conditions where storefront system is to be installed, with Installer present, for compliance with requirements for installation tolerances and other conditions affecting performance of system. Notify the Architect and Owner in writing of conditions detrimental to the proper and timely completion of the work. Do not proceed with installation until unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected. B. Verify dimensions taken at the job site affecting the work. Bring field dimensions which are at variance to the attention of the architect and Owner. Obtain decision regarding corrective measures before the start of installation. 3.2 INSTALLATION A. General:  Comply with manufacturer's written instructions for protecting, handling, and installing storefront system. Do not install damaged components. Fit joints to produce hairline joints free of burrs and distortion. Rigidly secure non-movement joints. Seal joints watertight, unless otherwise indicated. Provide means to drain water to the exterior to produce a permanently weatherproof system. B. Use only skilled tradesmen with work done in accordance with approved Shop Drawings and Specifications. C. Metal Protection: Where aluminum will contact dissimilar metals, protect against galvanic action by painting contact surfaces with primer or by applying sealant or tape recommended by manufacturer for this purpose.  Where aluminum will contact concrete or masonry, protect against corrosion by painting contact surfaces with bituminous paint. D. Install components to drain water passing joints, condensation occurring in glazing channels, condensation occurring within framing members, and moisture migrating within the system to the exterior. E. Install framing members plumb and true in alignment with established lines and grades. F. Adjust system for proper operation after installation. G. Furnish and apply sealants to provide a weathertight installation at all metal-to-metal joints and intersections of frames and at opening perimeters. Wipe off excess material and leave all exposed surfaces and joints clean and smooth. 1. No sealant shall project beyond the face of the adjacent surface. H. Anchorage:  After system components are positioned, fix connections to building structure as indicated on Shop Drawings. 1. Provide separators and isolators to prevent metal corrosion and electrolytic deterioration and to prevent impeding movement of moving joints. 2. Provide means for back-off prevention such as lock washer or spot welding. No liquid thread locks shall be permitted. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-26 3. Anchor component parts by bolting and welding. Install slip pads between moving parts. 4. Where slots or oversized holes are provided for adjustment only, secure connection after final adjustment. Interlocking serrations in extruded aluminum brackets and washers are preferred. Steel weld washers with 0.25 inch minimum thickness are acceptable with steel brackets. 5. Remove temporary shims and fasteners. Leave expansion joints free to move as designed. I. Glazing: 1. Install glazing according to approved Shop Drawings and approved field-glazing requirements. Glaze in temperatures above 40 degrees F. Comply with GANA glazing manual. 2. Inspect frame for proper dimensions and squareness. Adjust frame and/or glass size as required to meet specified requirements. 3. Clean glazing pocket before setting glass. Solvents shall be compatible with finished aluminum, glass and glazing materials. Setting blocks shall be equidistant from glass centerline. Location of setting blocks at glass quarter points is acceptable. Distance from vertical glass edge to nearest edge of setting block shall not be less than six inches. 4. Where gasket joints occur, tightly butt ends and seal with compatible sealant. Gasket joints shall not occur at locations other than corners if their use is permitted. 5. Inspect glass before installation. Do not install glass which does not conform to specification. Replace glass that is broken, damaged, cracked, or permanently stained. 6. Except as otherwise specified, comply with GANA Glazing Manual. 7. Clean, prime and mask structural silicone joints during same day in which silicone is applied. 8. Temporarily clamp glass during cure of structural silicone. After sufficient cure, remove clamps and fill gaps in silicone. 9. Mask glass and aluminum during application of structural silicone. Remove masking immediately after tooling sealant. 10. Structural silicone shall not be applied to edges of insulating glass units, or to edges of laminated glass units. Sealants used as weather seals shall not be placed against edge of laminated glass interlayer. J. Clean surfaces to be sealed. Install backer, primers and sealant according to approved Shop Drawings, sealant test results and manufacturer’s recommendations. Tool sealant after application. Immediately remove masking.  Comply with requirements of Section 079200, "Joint Sealants." 3.3 ERECTION TOLERANCES A. Install storefront system to comply with the following maximum tolerances, unless tighter tolerances are required for proper operation and performance: 1. Plumb:  1/8 inch in 10 feet; 1/4 inch in 40 feet. 2. Level:  1/8 inch in 20 feet; 1/4 inch in 40 feet. 3. Alignment: Where surfaces abut in line, limit offset from true alignment to 1/16 inch; where a reveal or protruding element separates aligned surfaces by less than 2 inches, limit offset to 1/4 inch. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-27 4. Location: Limit variation from plane or location shown on Shop Drawings to 1/8 inch in 12 feet; 1/4 inch over total length. 5. Amount or total deviation or misalignment in any direction for vertical members; 1/8" maximum in 24'-0" run. 6. Maximum offset from true alignment between 2 abutting members will be 1/32". No edge projection will be permitted. B. Maximum joint gap or opening between removable glazing stop, filler or closure and its adjacent member will be 1/32" or a maximum 1/32" cumulative opening at both ends of removable members (1/64" each end). 3.4 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Special Inspection: Owner will employ and pay a special inspector of curtain wall installation according to the requirements of the Building Code, and special inspection requirements for wall panels, curtain walls, and veneers. Contractor shall cooperate with inspector; allow the inspector unrestricted access to the work, both in the plant and in the field. Ensure that elements of construction requiring special inspection are not concealed prior to completion of special inspection of those elements. 1. Inspection by the Owners Agent shall not release Contractor of responsibility to perform quality control/quality assurance and comply with Contract Documents and Codes. B. Testing Agency:  Owner shall engage a qualified independent testing agency to perform testing indicated. 1. Field air and water testing shall be performed at three (3) locations designated by exterior wall consultant. The testing shall be performed foreach system type, including operating windows if applicable, at 5%, 10% and 25% of construction. Testing shall be performed in accordance with AAMA 503.There shall be no reduction of the performance requirements in sub-section 2 of this Specification. Diagnostic water testing shall be tested per AAMA 501.2 calibrated hose testing. 2. QA/QC Flood Testing of panel to panel joint intersection boot installation, if applicable. Perform a minimum of one test per floor. 3. Cast-in-place embeds shall be tested in accordance with ASTM E488, if applicable. Embeds shall not fail when tested to the full design shear and tension loads. Number of tests shall be as determined by the Owner’s Façade Consultant but no less than 10 tests. 4. Welding inspection of exterior wall components and welding inspector qualification of structural steel shall be in accordance with AWS D1.1. C. Repair or remove Work that does not meet requirements or that is damaged by testing; replace to conform to specified requirements. D. Additional testing and inspecting, at Contractor's expense, will be performed to determine compliance of replaced or additional work with specified requirements. E. Field Adhesion Testing of Non-structural Sealants: Contractor shall provide field-test of adhesion of joint-sealant to joint substrates. Testing shall be performed in the presence of the sealant manufacturer’s field representative. All test results shall be logged into a project book and retained and made available for review upon request. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-28 1. Extent of Testing: At a minimum, test completed elastomeric sealant joints as follows: a. Perform 10 tests for the first 1000 feet of joint length for each type of elastomeric sealant and joint substrate. b. Perform one test for each 1000 feet of joint length thereafter or one test per each floor per elevation. c. Record results in a field adhesion test log to be provided as requested. d. Additional testing as required to obtain sealant warranty. F. Field Quality Control Testing of Structural Sealants: Contractor shall comply with sealant manufacturer’s specifications for temperature and surface preparation. Contractor shall perform the following tests in accordance with sealant manufacturer’s technical manuals. All test results shall be logged into a project book and retained and made available for review upon request. 1. For One-part structural sealants, skin-over time and peel-adhesion test shall be performed for each panel. 2. For Two-part structural sealants, snake test, butterfly test and snap-time test for each cartridge. 3.5 PROTECTION A. All units shall be protected from weather and damage at all times during the installation process. B. Provide final protection and maintain conditions, in a manner acceptable to manufacturer and Installer, which ensure system is without damage or deterioration at the time of Substantial Completion. C. Protect materials against damage and contamination. Protective film shall be provided on exposed sills, trim and panels and removed when the building is occupied. Panel and components shall be stored off the ground and covered until installation. Trade Contractors shall provide additional handling recommendations and requirements. Clean surfaces as required to remove corrosive substances, during and at conclusion of construction. Remove all stickers from the system. Remove sealant residue from aluminum and glass. D. All subcontractors shall be made aware that the exterior wall materials are finished products. The finished material shall not be used for work benches, print tables or any other use other than the use intended. Damage can occur to the finished metal and/or the glazing products if caution is not utilized around these materials. E. All subcontractors shall be cautioned to refrain from cutting, burning, welding and grinding around the exterior wall materials. Sparks or metal filings from these operations will cause permanent damage to the glass. Any damage to glass, regardless to event, will need to be removed and replaced with new material at no cost to the Owner. F. Temporary protection shall be provided immediately after walls are installed and maintained until substantial completion. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  ALUMINUM ENTRANCE & STOREFRONTS 084113-29 G. The Contractor is responsible for any damage to the units until the installed units have been accepted by the Owner or an agent of the Owner. H. Leave-outs at hoists and other areas will be required. Provide methodology of infill installation. I. Periodically remove from the site debris, excess materials and unused tools and equipment resulting from this work. At conclusion, leave premises in clean condition. END OF SECTION 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  REVOLVING DOOR ENTRANCES 084233-1 SECTION 084233 – REVOLVING DOOR ENTRANCE PART 1 GENERAL 1.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS A. Work of this Section, as shown or specified, shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Contract Documents. B. Work shall comply with governing agencies having jurisdiction. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Work of this Section includes all labor, materials, equipment, and services necessary to complete the engineering, detailing, fabrication and installation of the manual and security revolving door entrance assemblies as shown on the drawings and/or specified herein. B. This section includes but is not limited to the following: 1. Provide complete glass revolving door units fabricated, assembleid, and tested for proper operation at the factory. Include wings, enclosures, lights, hardware (except lock cylinder), weatherstripping, collapsing mechanism, speed control, and other components as herein specfieid. 2. Glass and glazing for work of this section, including ceilings, drums, and wings. 3. Custom push/pull bars and cylinder locks (2 per door). 1.3 REFERENCES A. All work shall comply with the codes and standards referenced below, unless a more stringent requirement is given in the specification. The standards referenced below are intended to be a benchmark, but should be exceeded where more stringent performance criteria are required by the Contract Documents or local governing agencies having jurisdiction. In the event of conflict, the most stringent requirements shall govern and be incorporated into the work. The most recent codes and standards shall apply, unless otherwise noted: 1. New York City Building Code. 2. New York State Energy Conservation Construction Code. 3. AAMA 611 -Voluntary Specification for Anodized Architectural Aluminum 2020. 4. ADA Standards -2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design 2010. 5. ASCE 7 -Minimum Design Loads and Associated Criteria for Buildings and Other Structures Most Recent Edition Cited by Referring Code or Reference Standard. 6. ASTM A36/A36M -Standard Specification for Carbon Structural Steel 2019. 7. ASTM A123/A123M -Standard Specification for Zinc (Hot-Dip Galvanized) Coatings on Iron and Steel Products 2017. 8. ASTM A653/A653M -Standard Specification for Steel Sheet, Zinc-Coated (Galvanized) or Zinc-Iron Alloy-Coated (Galvannealed) by the Hot-Dip Process 2022. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY ISSUED FOR BID WATERMAN PROPERTIES STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT 28 January 2025 REVOLVING DOOR ENTRANCES 084233-2 9. ASTM A666 -Standard Specification for Annealed or Cold-Worked Austenitic Stainless Steel Sheet, Strip, Plate, and Flat Bar 2015. 10. ASTM B36/B36M -Standard Specification for Brass Plate, Sheet, Strip, and Rolled Bar 2018. 11. ASTM B209/B209M -Standard Specification for Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Sheet and Plate 2021a. 12. ASTM B221 -Standard Specification for Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Extruded Bars, Rods, Wire, Profiles, and Tubes 2021. 13. ASTM B221M -Standard Specification for Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Extruded Bars, Rods, Wire, Profiles, and Tubes (Metric) 2021. 14. ASTM B455/B455M -Standard Specification for Copper-Zinc-Lead Alloy (Leaded-Brass) Extruded Shapes 2020. 15. ASTM E283/E283M -Standard Test Method for Determining Rate of Air Leakage Through Exterior Windows, Skylights, Curtain Walls, and Doors Under Specified Pressure Differences Across the Specimen 2019. 16. BHMA A156.27 -Power And Manual Operated Revolving Pedestrian Doors 2019. 17. NFPA 70 -National Electrical Code Most Recent Edition Adopted by Authority Having Jurisdiction, Including All Applicable Amendments and Supplements. 18. UL (DIR) -Online Certifications Directory Current Edition. 1.4 DELEGATED DESIGN A. The requirements for the revolving door assemblies shown on the Contract Drawings establish basis dimensions, profiles, and sightlines. Within the limitations established by design intent as shown in drawings and specifications, the Contractor is responsible for the design and engineering of the entire system. The system must be capable of meeting all the specified performance requirements. Upon request, provide test data which indicates the system(s) meets the specified performance requirements. B. The design details do not cover all conditions which require solution. It is, however, intended that conditions not detailed shall be developed through the Contractor’s shop drawings to the same level of aesthetics and in compliance with performance criteria, as indicated for detailed areas and stipulated in these specifications. The Contractor, by accepting a contract for the work, acknowledges this and agrees that the Architect shall have final approval on design details. 1.5 SUBMITTALS A. Submittals shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 1. Product Data: Submit manufacturer's product data, recommendations and standard details for revolving doors, including fabrication, finishing, hardware, accessories, and other components of work. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  REVOLVING DOOR ENTRANCES 084233-3 2. Shop Drawings: Submit shop drawings for fabrication and installation of revolving doors and associated components of work. Show anchors, enclosures, and speed control units. Include glazing details and interface details with structural glass wall system. 3. Cutaway Samples: Vertical-to-horizontal intersection of door wings and framing, made from minimum 6-inch lengths of full-size components and showing details o the following: a. Joinery b. Anchorage c. Expansion provisions d. Glazing 4. Manufacturer's Installation Instructions: Indicate special procedures, perimeter conditions requiring special attention. 5. Product Certificates: Signed by manufacturers of revolving entrance doors certifying that products furnished comply with means of egress requirements. 6. Qualification Data: For firms and persons specified in “Quality Assurance” Article to demonstrate etheir capabilities and experience. Include lists of completed projects with project names and addresse, names and addresses of Archiects and Owners, and other information specified. 7. Product Test Reports: Based on evaluation of comprehensive tests performed by manufacturer and witnessed by a qualified testing agency, indicating current revolving entrance door assemblies comply with requirements. 8. Maintenance Data: For revolving entrance doors, to include in maintenance manuals, 9. Sample product Warranty. 1.6 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Manufacturer's Qualifications: A firm experienced in manufacturing revolving entrance doors similar to those indicated for this Project and with a record of successful in-service performance. B. Source Limitations: Obtain revolving entrance doors through one source from a single manufacturer. C. Welding: Qualify procedures and personnel according to the following: 1. AWS D1.1, "Structural Welding Code--Steel." 2. AWS D1.3, "Structural Welding Code--Sheet Steel." D. Means of Egress Requirements: Comply with requirements of authorities having jurisdiction for revolving entrance doors serving as a component of a means of egress, including 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  REVOLVING DOOR ENTRANCES 084233-4 capability of collapsing into a book-fold position, minimum exit width, maximum turning speed, and maximum force required to collapse door wings. E. Safety Glass: Category II materials complying with testing requirements in 16 CFR 1201, and in ANSI Z97.1. 1.7 PROJECT CONDITIONS A. Field Measurements:  Verify dimensions of openings in construction work by field measurements before fabrication and show recorded measurements on Shop Drawings. Coordinate fabrication schedule with construction progress to avoid delaying the Work. 1. Where field measurements cannot be made without delaying the Work, guarantee dimensions and proceed with fabrication without field measurements. Coordinate construction to ensure that actual dimensions correspond to guaranteed dimensions and satisfy project tolerances. 1.8 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Deliver revolving entrance door glass, decorative metalwork, and other exposed elements in padded blankets or other approved protective wrapping, including temporary strippable protective covering for finished surfaces. A. Protect finished surfaces with wrapping; do not use adhesive papers or sprayed coatings that bond when exposed to sunlight or weather. 1.9 WARRANTIES A. General Warranty:  The special warranty specified in this Article shall not deprive the Owner of other rights the Owner may have under other provisions of the Contract Documents and shall be in addition to, and run concurrent with, other warranties made by the Contractor under requirements of the Contract Documents. A. Provide written warranty signed by manufacturer, installer and Contractor, agreeing to repair or replace revolving door assemblies including motorized operators and associated controls which fail in materials or workmanship within five (5) years of Substantial Completion. Failure of materials or workmanship includes excessive leakage or air infiltration, excessive deflections, faulty operation of entrances, deterioration of finish or construction in excess of normal weathering, and defects in hardware, weatherstripping, and other components of the work. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.1 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. Structural Design: Design and size components to withstand dead loads and live loads caused by positive and negative wind pressure acting normal to plane of entrance. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  REVOLVING DOOR ENTRANCES 084233-5 B. Design Pressure: In accordance with applicable local building codes. C. Seismic Loads: Design and size components to withstand seismic loads and sway displacement as calculated in accordance with applicable local building codes. D. Air Leakage: Maximum of 1.25 cu ft/min/sq ft of wall area, when tested in accordance with ASTM E283/E283M at 1.57 lbs/sq ft pressure differential across assembly. E. Expansion and Contraction: Provide for expansion and contraction of system components with cycling surface temperature range of 120 degrees F without detrimental effects. F. Deflection: Limit mullion deflection to L/175 or flexure limit of glass with full recovery of glazing materials, whichever is less. G. Movement: Design to accommodate movement within system, movement between system and perimeter framing components, dynamic loading and release of loads, and deflection of structural support framing, without damage to system or components, or deterioration of perimeter seal. H. Internal Drainage: Drain water entering joints, condensation occurring in glazing channels, or migrating moisture occurring within system, to exterior. I. Do not permit wind whistles, thermal movement transmitted to other building elements, and loosening, weakening, or fracturing of attachments or components of system. 2.2 MANUFACTURERS A. Storefront:  Provide products by one of the following or approved equal. 1. International Revolving Door, Comet, The All Glass Revolving Door 2. Dormakaba SS4000, The All Glass Manual Revolving Door 2.3 MATERIALS A. Aluminum Extrusions: ASTM B221 (ASTM B221M), 6063 alloy, T5 temper; thickness as required for application. B. Aluminum Sheet: ASTM B209/B209M; thickness as required for application. 1. Finish:  To match aluminum extrusions. C. Stainless Steel Sheet: ASTM A666 Type 304, rollable temper, 0.015 in (0.38 mm) minimum thickness. 1. Finish:  No. 4 -Satin Polished. D. Bronze Extrusions:  ASTM B455/B455M, UNS C38500 architectural bronze, thickness as required for application. 1. Finish:  Lacquered satin. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  REVOLVING DOOR ENTRANCES 084233-6 E. Bronze Sheet and Strip: Muntz Metal, ASTM B36/B36M UNS C28000, thickness as required for application. 1. Finish:  Lacquered satin. F. Steel Sections: ASTM A36/A36M, weldable type, shapes to suit mullion sections, galvanized in accordance with requirements of ASTM A123/A123M; painted with corrosion-inhibiting primer to separate from dissimilar metals. G. Sheet Steel: Hot-dipped galvanized steel sheet, ASTM A653/A653M, with G90/Z275 (G90/Z275) coating. H. Fasteners: Stainless steel. I. Hardware: Per the Archietect. 2.4 FABRICATION A. General: Fabricate revolving entrance door assembly components to designs, sizes, thicknesses, and configurations indicated. 1. Main Extrusions: Minimum wall thickness of 0.125 inch. 2. Glazing Stops and Gaskets: Manufacturer's standard snap-on, extruded aluminum, square glazing stops with minimum wall thickness of 0.062 inch; and preformed resilient glazing gaskets. 3. Reinforcement: Provide reinforcement for hardware and operating mechanism necessary to meet performance requirements and to withstand operating stresses without metal or glass failure. 4. Weather Stripping: Install in stiles and in head and sill rails to be adjustable and replaceable without dismantling door wings. B. Prefabrication: Provide revolving entrance doors as prefabricated assemblies. Complete fabrication, assembly, finishing, hardware application, and other work in the factory to greatest extent possible to minimize field splicing and assembly. Disassemble units only as necessary for shipping and handling limitations. 1. Do not drill and tap for surface-mounted hardware items until time of installation at Project site. 2. Perform fabrication operations, including cutting, fitting, forming, drilling, and grinding of metalwork in manner that prevents damage to exposed finish surfaces. For hardware, perform these operations before applying finishes. 3. Form shapes with sharp profiles, straight and free of defects or deformations, before finishing. 4. Prepare components to receive concealed fasteners and anchor and connection devices. B. Welding: Weld components to comply with referenced AWS standard. Weld before finishing components to greatest extent possible. Weld in concealed locations to greatest extent 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  REVOLVING DOOR ENTRANCES 084233-7 possible to minimize distortion or discoloration of finish. Remove weld spatter and welding oxides from exposed surfaces by descaling or grinding. C. Glazing Channels: Provide minimum clearances for thickness and type of glass indicated according to GANA's "Glazing Manual." C. Metal Protection: Separate dissimilar metals to protect against galvanic action by applying sealant or tape recommended by manufacturer for this purpose. D. Welded Construction: Weld reinforcement firmly in place. Weld corners. Grind and polish welds to produce an invisible joint. Mechanically finish exposed surfaces after fabrication to eliminate surface blemishes caused by welding, rolling, bending, and forming. E. Exposed Fasteners: Do not use exposed fasteners. F. Hardware: Install hardware, except surface-mounted hardware, at fabrication plant. Remove only as required for final finishing operation and for delivery to and installation at Project site. G. Doors: Fabricate revolving entrance doors in profiles indicated. Reinforce as required to support imposed loads and for installing hardware. Factory assemble door and enclosure units. H. Enclosure Walls and Ceilings: Fabricate tubular and channel frame assemblies in configuration indicated, with welded joints according to manufacturer's standards and as specified. Provide subframes and reinforcement of types required for a complete system to support required loads. 1. Exterior Framing: Fabricate components to drain water passing joints and condensation and moisture occurring or migrating within the system to the exterior. Provide anchorage and alignment brackets for concealed support of assembly from the building structure. Allow for thermal expansion of exterior units. D. Factory-Glazed Door Fabrication: Glaze door wings at the factory. Comply with glazing requirements specified in this Section and in Section 088000. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.1 EXAMINATION A. Examine areas, surfaces, and conditions where revolving doors are to be installed, with Installer present, for compliance with requirements for installation tolerances and other conditions affecting performance of system. Notify the Architect and Owner in writing of conditions detrimental to the proper and timely completion of the work. Do not proceed with installation until unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected. B. Verify dimensions taken at the job site affecting the work. Bring field dimensions which are at variance to the attention of the architect and Owner. Obtain decision regarding corrective measures before the start of installation. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  REVOLVING DOOR ENTRANCES 084233-8 3.2 PREPARATION A. Templates and Diagrams: Furnish templates, diagrams, and other data to fabricators of structural glass wall work, as necessary for coordinating revolving entrance door installation. 3.3 INSTALLATION A. General: Comply with revolving entrance door manufacturer's written installation instructions, unless more stringent requirements are indicated. Do not install damaged components. Rigidly secure non-movement joints. Seal joints watertight.Use only skilled tradesmen with work done in accordance with approved Shop Drawings and Specifications. B. Metal Protection: Where dissimilar metals will contact each other, protect against galvanic action by applying sealant or tape recommended by manufacturer for this purpose. C. Recessed, Floor-Mounted Speed-Control Unit: Insert control unit in rough-in floor opening set on level bed of non-shrink, nonmetallic grout. Fill annular space between control unit and sides of recess with non-shrink, non-metallic grout. Mix and place grout to comply with grout manufacturer's written instructions. D. Entrances: Install entrances plumb and true in alignment with established lines and grades without warp or rack of framing members and doors. Anchor securely in place. Lubricate operating hardware and other moving parts. 1. Install surface-mounted hardware using concealed fasteners. 2. Install components to drain water passing joints and condensation and moisture occurring or migrating within the assembly to the exterior. E. Cut and trim framing during installation only with approval of manufacturer and according to manufacturer's written instructions. 1. Restore finish and remove and replace members, as directed, where cutting and trimming have impaired strength or appearance. 2. Do not install members that are warped, bowed, deformed, or otherwise damaged or defaced to such an extent as to impair strength or appearance. Remove and replace members, as directed, that have been damaged during installation. F. Glazing: Comply with installation requirements in Section 088000, unless otherwise indicated. G. Sealants: Comply with requirements of Section 079200 for installing sealants, filters, and gaskets. 1. Set continuous sill members and flashing in a full sealant bed to provide weathertight construction, unless otherwise indicated. 2. Seal frame perimeter with sealant to provide weathertight construction. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  REVOLVING DOOR ENTRANCES 084233-9 3.4 ERECTION TOLERANCES A. Maximum Diagonal Distortion (Warp): 1/8 inch (3 mm) measured with straight edge or taut string, corner to corner, over 36 x 84 inch (915 x 215 mm) surface area. B. Maximum Vertical Distortion (Bow): 1/8 inch (3 mm) measured with straight edge or taut string, top to bottom, over 36 x 84 inch (915 x 215 mm) surface area. C. Maximum Misalignment of Two Adjoining Sections Abutting in Plane: 0.015 inches (0.4 mm). 3.5 ADJUSTING A. Adjust doors to provide an even, tight fit at contact points and weather stripping for smooth operation and weathertight closure. Adjust doors to operate smoothly and rotate evenly, with hardware and operators functioning properly. 1. Lubricate hardware and other moving parts. 2. Adjust speed-control unit for required rpm. 3. Adjust pressure for collapse of door wings, as follows: a. Maximum Pressure Setting: 130 lbf. 4. Readjust doors after repeated operation of completed installation 3.6 CLEANING AND PROTECTION A. Clean glass and metal surfaces promptly after installation. Remove excess glazing and sealant compounds, dirt, and other substances. Repair damaged finish to match original finish. B. Provide final protection and maintain conditions, including limiting construction traffic, that ensure revolving entrance doors are without damage or deterioration at time of Substantial Completion. 3.7 DEMONSTRATION A. Engage a factory-authorized service representative to train Owner's maintenance personnel to adjust, operate, and maintain revolving entrance doors as specified below: 1. Train Owner's maintenance personnel on procedures and schedules for starting up and shutting down, troubleshooting, servicing, and maintaining equipment and schedules. B. Review data in maintenance manuals. C. Schedule training with Owner, through Architect, with at least seven days' advance notice. END OF SECTION 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  GLASS AND GLAZING 088000-1 SECTION 088000 -GLASS AND GLAZING PART 1 GENERAL PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.1 GLASS A. Glass shall be of the types and minimum thickness, as shown on the drawings and specified herein, and shall, in addition, meet the requirements of the following paragraphs. Fabricate glazing units in sizes required to fit into building elevator. B. All glass shall be the manufactured product of one (1) company. All fabricated glass products shall be the fabricated and coated products of one (1) company. All glass shall be delivered to the site bearing the manufacturer’s label, complete with glazing instructions where applicable. All glass to be fully edge deleted to allow for primary seal to contact the deleted surface, this includes areas where coatings are applied over frit and edge of IGU. C. Safety Glazing Labeling: Where safety glazing is indicated, permanently mark glazing with certification label of the manufacturer. Label shall indicate manufacturer’s name, type of glass, thickness, and safety glazing standard with which glass complies. D. Glass thicknesses indicated on the drawings and/or specified herein are minimums and are for detailing only. Confirm glass thicknesses by analyzing Project loads and in-service conditions. Provide glass lites for various size openings in nominal thicknesses indicated, but not less than thicknesses and in strengths required to meet or exceed the following criteria: 1. Glass Thicknesses: Select minimum glass thicknesses to comply with ASTM E 1300 and Design Wind Load with probability of breakage not exceeding 8/1000. 2. Provide safety glazing where required by Building Code. 3. The lites comprising insulating glass units shall be heat treated. (Annealed glass shall not be used unless written acceptance by the glass manufacturer is provided stating annealed glass is capable of withstanding the project specific design loads, thermal stresses and site specific thermal shock loading) All lites of a spandrel IGU shall be heat treated E. Insulating glass units shall be 1-1/4” thick (minimum), consisting of two lites of 3/8” (minimum) glass separated by a desiccant filled metal spacer with welded, fused, soldered or bent corners and welded, fused or soldered splices or joints to provide a 1/2” hermetically sealed and dehydrated space, maximum of 2 splices per IGU. Insulating glass shall be dual seal and certified for compliance with seal classification “CBA” by the Insulating Glass Certification Council (IGCC) and tested in accordance with the following ASTM Test methods. Secondary seal on structural silicone glazed units shall be a special silicone edge seal certified for use in structural silicone glazing applications over the temperature range and structural loading as called for under the performance criteria section of this Specification. Polyisobutylene (PIB) Primary sealant used shall have a proven record and be warranted for sealant migration. PIB shall make contact with the deleted glass surface. 1. ASTM E2188 Test Method for Insulating Glass Unit Performance 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  GLASS AND GLAZING 088000-2 2. ASTM E2189 Test Method for Testing Resistance to Fogging in Insulating Glass Units. 3. ASTM E2190 Standard Speciﬁcation for Insulating Glass Unit Performance and Evaluation 4. Low E Coating: Provide Low-E coating with complete, accurate and straight edge deletions of coatings at areas of insulating glass assemblies where Low-E coatings, metallic coating or other decorative coatings are applied to surfaces to be in contact with the primary seal of insulating glass units. Visible remnants of coating are not acceptable. 5. IGU Secondary Sealant: Per ASTM C 1249 “Standard Guide for Secondary Seal for Sealed Insulating Glass Units for Structural Sealant Glazing Applications” the secondary sealant must be applied continuously forming a uniformly dimensioned bead filling the cavity with sealant completely. Bubbles, skips, and bond voids are discontinuities in the seal and should be avoided. 6. IGU Primary Sealant: Per ASTM C 1249 “Standard Guide for Secondary Seal for Sealed Insulating Glass Units for Structural Sealant Glazing Applications” the primary seal must be applied in a continuous, uninterrupted, properly sized bead with no skips or voids. F. Laminated Glass: ASTM C 1172; Use types of glass shown in fabricating insulating glass units. Use quality of glass specified hereinbefore. Polyvinyl butyral sheet interlayer material, clear, and of thickness indicated with a proven record of no tendency to bubble, discolor, or lose physical and mechanical properties after laminating glass lights and installation. Fabricate laminated glass to produce glass free of foreign substances and air or glass pockets.  Laminate lites with polyvinyl butyral interlayer in autoclave with heat plus pressure. 1. Fabricate glazing units in sizes required to fit openings indicated for Project, with edge and face clearances, edge and surface conditions, and bite complying with written instructions of product manufacturer and referenced glazing publications, to comply with system performance requirements. Fabricate laminated glass to produce glass free of foreign substances and air or glass pockets. 2. For glazing installed on a slope of more than 15 deg, each lite of the IGU shall be laminated as required by the Building Code. G. Float glass shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C 1036, q3 quality H. Heat strengthened and tempered glass shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C 1048. Tempered glass shall also conform to ANSI Z97.1. All heat strengthening and tempering shall be by the horizontal process, and processed in such a manner as to have all roller distortion in a horizontal direction as installed on the building. 1. Roll Ripple Tolerances: Where the heat treatment process results in essentially parallel ripples or waves, the deviation from flatness at any peak (peak to valley deviation) shall not exceed 0.008” or the average roller wave distortion shall be certified not to exceed 0.002”, with maximum sag at the leading and trailing edge of 0.01”. (The more stringent requirement governing) A site inspection if required, for roller wave and bow tolerances should be viewed from a minimum distance of 10 feet. 2. Overall Bow and Warp Tolerances: Heat treated glass shall be examined by the glass manufacturer to detect and discard lights which exceed one half (50%) the maximum bow and warp tolerances in any direction as listed in ASTM C1048 Table 2. GLASS AND GLAZING 088000-3 3. Heat-Strengthened Glass: Comply with ASTM C1048, Kind HS. Strengthen by manufacturer’s standard heat-treatment process so that the residual surface compression is not less than 3500 PSI or greater than 7,500 PSI. 4. Fully Tempered Glass: Comply with ASTM C1048, FT. Strengthen by manufacturer’s standard heat-treatment process so that the residual surface compression is greater than 10,000 PSI 5. All fully tempered glass shall be heat soaked. Submit certification that tempered glass intended for use on the project has been heat soaked tested in accordance with BS EN 14179 “Glass in Buildings-Heat Soaked Thermally Toughened Soda Lime Silicate Safety Glass”, Parts 1 and 2. Glass manufacturer shall submit for approval their proposal for meeting this requirement. 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  I. Bird-Friendly Glass: Façade glass, glass railings, and other exterior glass shall comply with amendments to the New York City Building Code (Code) mandated by Local Law 15 of 2020. Bird friendly glass shall meet the definition of Bird Friendly Material as defined by Code. 1. Bird-friendly glass shall be required where shown in architectural drawings, within 75-feet of grade, within 12-feet of green roofs, and at Bird Hazard Installation and Fly-Though Conditions as defined by Code. 2. Threat Factor: Glass shall meet a Threat Factor of not more than 25, or, where allowed by Code, not more than 27. 3. Documentation of threat factor: Threat factor of all proposed glass shall be verified and documented in writing as required by Code. Threat factor of glass shall be established by means of one of the following: a. Testing: provide written documentation that glass has been tested by the American Bird Conservancy. Testing by other organizations may be submitted for consideration by the architect of record. b. Evaluation: Written documentation from the American Bird Conservancy stating that they have evaluated the proposed glass and found it to be equivalent to a tested bird friendly glass product. Documentation of testing or evaluation shall reflect all proposed bird-friendly glass assemblies, and all components of the assembly including but not limited to inner, outer, and intermediate panes, frits, laminates, low-e coatings, and all treatments or features that affect the appearance of the glass. 4. Acceptable products: The contractor may propose the following products for use within a bird-friendly glass assembly. The proposed pattern and full assembly shall be tested or evaluated, and shall meet the required Threat Factor and all other requirements of this specification. Contractor shall verity that proposed products are available in the sizes required, and without delay to project schedule, a. UV-Reflective Pattern: 1). Arnold Glas: Ornilux, Mikado pattern 2). McGrory Glass, BirdProtect, McGrory Glass 3). Guardian Glass, Bird1st GLASS AND GLAZING 088000-4 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  b. Etched Pattern: 1). Walker Glass, Aviprotek (#1 surface) 2). Skyline Design, Eco Etch (#1 surface) 3). Guardian (#1 Surface) c. Fritted Pattern (ceramic frit): 1). Ferro S1de One (#1 surface). 2). Viracon (#2 surface). d. Laminated Pattern (non UV-pattern): 1). SEEN / Eastman e. Window Film 1). Solyx, Bird Safe Film J. Visual Mockup/Tabletop Mockup:  To be performed with the understanding that it will determine the job requirements for glass appearance including aesthetic quality. Project specific visual mockup shall govern over industry requirements for glass, including aesthetic quality, where more stringent. This applies to industry standards (ASTM) as well as individual glass fabricator standards. The intent is for the quality of the glass installed on the project, including aesthetic appearance, to match the quality range presented and accepted at the visual mockup. 1. Anisotropy, quench marks or distortion in transmission that are visible by the naked eye are grounds for rejection and replacement of glass. Glass shall be uniform in appearance within one panel and consistent from panel to panel in flatness and color. K. Stress Breakage: Design glass to resist temperature stress breakage. Provide thermal stress assessment including evaluation for rapid heat gain (shock) of all glass conditions and provide confirmation the design of the system and glass is fit for the intended purpose. L. Differential Shading:  Design glass to resist thermal stresses induced by differential shading within individual glass lites. M. Color Variation: between adjacent glass units shall not exceed a .E of 2 as defined by ASTM D2244. Color variation shall not exceed a .E of 3 from the approved sample. N. Glass Edges: Unless otherwise shown or specified, provide the following: 1. Exposed glass edges shall be ground, polished chamfered. 2. All other glass shall have high-quality seamed edges. 3. All glass edges shall conform to the requirements. a. Shark teeth edges shall not penetrate more than half the glass thickness b. Serration hackle shall not penetrate more than 10% of the glass thickness 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  GLASS AND GLAZING 088000-5 c. Flare shall not exceed 1/16” as measured perpendicular to the glass surface at the edge. d. Bevel shall not exceed 1/16” e. Flake chips shall not exceed 1/32” in length or .” diameter f. Rough chips exceeding the dimensions listed in Item e above shall not be permitted O. Spandrel Glass: ASTM C1048, Heat Treated, Condition B, Type I, Class 1, Quality Q3, color as selected. Apply fused opaque ceramic enamel coating on #4 surface of glass, or as called out in architectural drawings. Manufacturer shall provide analysis for thermal loads and provide the appropriate heat treatment of the inner lite. P. Contractor shall provide certification from glass producer/fabricator that glass producer/fabricator has reviewed all glazing details and thicknesses and finds same suitable for the purpose intended in accordance with these specifications. This shall include a written wind load and thermal stress analysis showing a probability of failure of no greater than 8 lites per thousand for conventional glazing at the design loads and local climatic thermal conditions Q. Glass producer/fabricator shall make regular inspections (maximum interval semi-monthly) of glazing work in progress at the point of glazing for both mock-up and job production units to verify that glazing is proceeding in accordance with his recommendations.  Glass producer/fabricator shall attend the mock-up test at no additional cost to the Owner. R. Contractor shall include in his design provision for reglazing lites from the interior, except for structurally glazed lites and spandrel lites which will be glazed from the exterior only.  Mock-up shall include lites shop glazed in the initial installation as well as field glazed in the replacement mode. S. Insulating glass units shall be installed in such manner as to adequately drain the glazing rabbet in a manner, as approved in writing, by the insulating unit glass manufacturer. T. Glazing Schedule (subject to meeting all criteria listed above): 1. GL-05: Storefront Vision Lite 1-1/4” th., low iron Insulated Glass Unit (IGU); outboard 3/8” th. low iron fully tempered w/ low-e coating on #2 surface; air space 1/2” th. air space, argon filled w/ black VTS spacer; inboard 3/8” th. low iron fully tempered. 2. GL-06: ALT: Storefront Vision Lite 1-1/2” th., low iron Insulated Glass Unit (IGU); outboard 1/2” th. low iron fully tempered w/ low-e coating on #2 surface; air space 1/2” th. air space, argon filled w/ black VTS spacer; inboard 1/2” th. low iron fully tempered. 3. GL-11: Storefront Spandrel Lite 1” th., low iron Insulated Glass Unit (IGU); outboard .” low iron, heat strengthened (HS) w/ solid frit on #2 surface; air space 1/2” th. air space, argon filled w/ black VTS spacer; inboard . low iron, heat strengthened (HS). 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  GLASS AND GLAZING 088000-6 4. GL-12: ALT: Storefront Spandrel Lite .” th., Lamianted Glass; Two .” thick low iron anneal glass, laminated with PVB solid color interlayer (0.030 in). Interlay color to be selected by the Architect. END OF SECTION 850 3RD AVENUE, REDEVELOPMENT -New York, NY  ISSUED FOR BID  WATERMAN PROPERTIES  STOREFRONT REPLACEMENT  28 January 2025  