https://app.buildvision.io/admin/organizations/75ae1f37-2abd-490a-8229-913f85bb2cef/package-projects/927efb28-6593-472f-a377-702743c3ef3b/detailsBarnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  SECTION 230500 COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SECTION INCLUDES A. Provide labor, materials, accessories, and other related items as required to complete operations in connection with the complete installation of the HVAC and mechanical systems as indicated on the Drawings and as specified herein. 1.2 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Conditions of the Contract apply to the work, including the work of this Division. Examine Contract Documents for requirements affecting the work. B. Provide cooperation with, and assistance to, the Commissioning Agent as specified under “Responsibilities” in Division 01 Section “General Commissioning Requirements.” C. Provide cooperation with, and assistance to, the Testing and Balancing (TAB) Agent specified in Division 23 Section “Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing for Mechanical Systems.” 1.3 MECHANICAL PRE-CONSTRUCTION MEETING A. Conduct a mechanical conference at Project site to comply with requirements of Division 01 Section “Project Management and Coordination” and the following: 1. At least 14 days prior to beginning of mechanical work, conduct a meeting to review detailed requirements for mechanical systems installation and testing requirements. Review mechanical Drawings and Specifications, discuss project specific details and requirements, and review and discuss expectations for quality control. Establish preliminary work progress schedule and procedures for materials inspection, testing, and certifications. Require representatives of each entity directly concerned with mechanical systems installation to attend conference, including, but not limited to, the following: a. General Contractor's superintendent. b. Mechanical Subcontractors’ project managers. c. Mechanical Subcontractors’ job foremen. d. Sheetmetal job foreman. e. Plumbing job foreman. COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC 230500 -1 f. Controls job foreman. g. Project mechanical Engineer/designer. h. Job clerk. i. Architect’s construction administrator. 1.4 DRAWINGS A. The general location of the apparatus and the details of the work are indicated on the Drawings. Exact locations not indicated shall be determined at the site as the work progresses and shall be subject to the Architect's approval. B. It is not intended that the Drawings shall show every pipe, pipe rise, pipe drop, duct rise, duct drop, pipe fitting, duct fitting, or appliance, but it shall be a requirement to furnish, without additional expense, material and labor necessary to complete the systems in accordance with the design intent and with the highest possible quality available. 1.5 REQUIREMENTS A. Installation Instructions: Obtain manufacturer’s printed installation instructions to aid in properly executing work on major pieces of equipment. Install equipment in accordance with manufacturer’s recommendations. B. Objectionable Noise, Fumes and Vibration: 1. Mechanical and electrical equipment shall operate without creating objectionable noise, fumes, or vibration, as determined by the Architect. 2. If such objectionable noise, fumes, or vibration is produced and transmitted to occupied portions of building by apparatus, piping, ducts, or any other part of mechanical and electrical work, make necessary changes and additions, as approved, without extra cost to Owner. C. Equipment Design and Installation: 1. Uniformity: Unless otherwise specified, equipment or material of same type or classification, used for same purposes, shall be product of same manufacturer. 2. Design: Equipment and accessories not specifically described or identified by manufacturer's catalog number shall be designed in conformity with ASME, IEEE, or other applicable technical standards, suitable for maximum working pressure, and with neat and finished appearance. 3. Installation: Erect equipment aligned, level and adjusted for satisfactory operation. Install so that connecting and disconnecting of piping and accessories can be made readily, and so that parts are easily accessible for inspection, operation, maintenance and repair. Minor deviations from indicated COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC 230500 -2 arrangements may be made, as approved. D. Hanging of Equipment, Ductwork and Piping: 1. Support equipment, ductwork and piping from the top chord of bar joists at the “Panel Points” or from the top flange of beams. Piping 2-inch (50 mm) nominal and smaller may be supported from the bottom chord of the bar joists at the “Panel Points” or from the bottom flange of the beams. E. Protection of Equipment and Materials: Responsibility for care and protection of materials and mechanical work rests with the Contractor until the entire project has been completed, tested and the project is accepted by the Owner. F. Foundations: 1. Ceiling Mounting: Where ceiling mounting is indicated or specified, use suspended platform or strap hangers, bracket or shelf, whichever is most suitable for equipment and its location. Construct of structural steel members, steel plates, or rods, as required; brace and fasten to building structure or to inserts as approved, or as detailed. 2. Where floor mounting is indicated, locate equipment on 4 inch (102 mm) high reinforced concrete pad of adequate size with anchors and base plates as required, on pressure-treated sleepers, or on structural steel frame as detailed. The corners of pads shall be chamfered 1 inch (25 mm). Pad and steel sizes and location shall be coordinated with the approved equipment. 1.6 ACCESS PANELS A. Access panels required for items furnished under Division 23 shall be provided under this Division. B. Manufacturer, and Model of standard doors: J. L. Industries, Inc., Model WB; Karp Associates, Inc., Model KDW; or The Williams Brothers Corporation of America, Model WB-DW. C. Access panels shall be standard panels, 12 inch x 16 inch (305 mm x 406 mm) minimum unless indicated otherwise. Panels installed in areas of high moisture concentration, such as locker rooms, near plumbing fixtures, food preparation areas, or outdoors, shall be fabricated of paintable stainless steel or aluminum for corrosion resistance. D. Doors and frames shall be factory primed. Latches shall be operated by tumbler lock, keyed alike, furnish 3 keys to the Owner. E. Access panels in fire-rated construction shall have the same UL rating as the building assembly in which they are installed. F. Provide access panels in building construction where required for access to duct access doors or other components such as valves, air vents, actuators, volume COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC 230500 -3 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  dampers, motorized dampers in ductwork, duct smoke detectors, and other related items. 1.7 ELECTRIC WORK A. Provide motors, pilot lights, controllers, limit switches, and other related items for equipment provided under Division 23. B. Except as noted, required line switches, fused switches, and other related items and necessary wiring to properly connect equipment to motors and switches shall be furnished and installed under Division 26, Electric. C. Provide complete wiring system for automatic temperature controls as specified under Division 23 Section “Instrumentation and Controls for Mechanical Systems.” D. Wiring shall conform to the requirements of the National Electrical Code. 1.8 FIRESTOPPING A. Firestopping for penetrations of ductwork, piping and equipment through fire rated and smoke rated building assemblies, including but not limited to partitions, walls, floors, ceilings, and roofs, shall be furnished and installed under this Section. B. Selection of firestopping materials and installation of firestopping materials shall be in accordance with Division 07 Section “Penetration Firestopping.” Coordinate with other trades for a consistent installation. C. Refer to Architectural Drawings for locations of fire rated building assemblies. 1.9 SUBMITTALS A. After award of Contract and before installation, submit for approval Shop Drawings, bulletins, Product Data, Samples, and other related items. B. Submit Shop Drawings and Product Data as required in each Section. Submittal shall include physical data and performance data required to verify compliance with the Contract Documents. C. Submit Samples as required in each Section, and as indicated on the Drawings. These will generally be retained by the Architect/Engineer, unless otherwise indicated. Contractor may request these items returned; provide return shipping for returns. D. Submit Mock-Ups as required in each Section, and as indicated on the Drawings. For general mock-up procedures, refer to Division 01 Section “Quality Requirements.” Deliver to the Architect/Engineer for review if so indicated. Provide return shipping. E. Architect/Engineer’s review will not include the review, coordination, or verification of dimensions or quantities; these shall be the responsibility of the Contractor. COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC 230500 -4 1.10 SUBSTITUTIONS A. Comply with provisions of the Instructions to Bidders and General Conditions. B. The first item listed under “Acceptable Manufacturers”, “Approved Manufacturers” or “Manufacturers” is the design basis. 1. Other manufacturers listed may be used in the base bid, but conformance with details of the Specifications, as well as dimensional and electrical data, shall be verified by the Contractor. 2. Architect/Engineer has not verified that each listed manufacturer has the ability to provide an acceptable substitution for the basis-of-design product. Contractor may not assume that substitutions will be approved. 3. Modifications required as a result of differences between the design basis item and the submitted and approved item must be approved by the Architect and made at the Contractor's expense. As an example, if a rooftop HVAC unit is submitted and approved and if the unit’s dimensions and weight are different from those of the unit which was used as the design basis, the Contractor shall be responsible for building structural modifications required to accommodate the submitted and approved unit, at no additional cost to the Owner. 4. When, in the Architect or Engineer’s opinion, architectural or engineering services are necessary for the coordination of substituted items, the Contractor shall reimburse the Owner for the cost of these services. 5. For items which have no manufacturers listed, any item conforming with the Contract Documents is acceptable. C. Substitutions from manufacturers or providers which are not listed may be proposed within the time allowed in the General Conditions of the Specifications. 1. The exception to this is products for which the list of manufacturers or providers is limited by the wording “no substitutions” or similar wording. 1.11 COORDINATION A. Coordinate scheduling, submittals, and Work of the various Sections of Specifications to assure efficient and orderly sequence of installation of interdependent construction elements, with provisions for accommodating items installed later. B. Verify that utility requirement characteristics of operating equipment are compatible with building utilities. Coordinate work of various Divisions having interdependent responsibilities for installing, connecting to, and placing in service, such equipment. C. Coordinate space requirements and installation of mechanical and electrical work which are indicated diagrammatically on Drawings. Follow routing shown for pipes, ducts, and conduit, as closely as practicable; place runs parallel with line of building. COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC 230500 -5 Utilize spaces efficiently to maximize accessibility for other installations, for maintenance, and for repairs. D. In finished areas, conceal pipes, ducts, and wiring within the construction. Coordinate locations of fixtures and outlets with finish elements. E. Coordinate completion and clean-up of work of separate Sections in preparation for Substantial Completion. F. After Owner occupancy of premises, coordinate access to site for correction of defective work and work not in accordance with Contract Documents, to minimize disruption of Owner's activities. 1.12 COORDINATION DRAWINGS A. As a requirement of this Specification, the Contractor shall participate in the development of a set of common coordination drawings for the project. B. The HVAC Mechanical Subcontractor shall be responsible to manage the coordination drawing effort and submit the drawings as shop drawings for review and comment. The HVAC Mechanical Subcontractor shall develop the base floor plans and building sections and place his mechanical equipment ductwork and piping on them. He shall then coordinate and manage each trade’s effort while they place their information on the same drawings. C. The coordination drawings may be CAD or hand drafted as selected by the HVAC Mechanical Subcontractor. Floor plans shall be prepared at a minimum scale of 1/4 inch = 1 ft. Sections through the entire building shall be prepared at a minimum scale of 1/4 inch = 1 ft. Detail sections across corridors or other small areas shall be prepared at a minimum scale of 1 inch = 1 ft. D. Prepare coordination drawings for both existing and new areas of the facility. The drawing detail shall be sufficient to ensure coordination between the trades and also with the building structure. As a minimum the following shall be shown in plan and section: 1. Building structure. 2. Major equipment. 3. Ceiling-mounted equipment in ceiling grid, such as lighting fixtures, HVAC diffusers, and sprinklers. 4. Ceilings in elevation 5. Duct work 6. Major duct, pipe, conduit and tray runs 7. Work in corridors COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC 230500 -6 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  8. Single pipe and conduits run outside of corridor areas when greater than 1-1/2 inch (38 mm) in nominal diameter. 9. As a minimum, indicate elevation of sprinkler piping in all areas. E. Mechanical HVAC, plumbing, fire protection and electrical construction shall not commence until coordination drawings have been reviewed. The Contractor shall bring any coordination issues to the attention of the Architect. Review of the coordination drawings by the Architect does not relieve the Contractor of his/her responsibility to provide a properly coordinated construction project. 1.13 REQUESTS FOR ARCHITECT’S CADD DRAWINGS A. In lieu of generating their own CADD drawings, the Contractor may elect to use the Architect’s electronic copies of CADD drawings for the purpose of developing coordination drawings, developing control system graphics or for other reasons that pertain to the requirements of this Contract. If the Contractor elects to utilize the Architect’s electronic copies of CADD drawings, the electronic files shall be purchased from the Architect at the Architect’s current billing rate per drawing. The Contractor shall provide payment and shall sign a release-of-liability form before electronic CADD drawings are released. 1.14 CLEANING A. Remove debris from site daily. B. Material and pieces of equipment shall be turned over to the Owner free of dust and dirt, both inside and out. C. At the completion of the Project, equipment shall have a clean, neat appearance of factory finish by cleaning or repainting as required. D. At the completion of the Project, surfaces exposed to view shall have a clean, neat appearance of finish free from smudges and scratches by cleaning or repainting as required. 1.15 STARTING SYSTEMS A. Coordinate schedule for start-up of various equipment and systems. B. Notify Architect/Engineer 7 days prior to start-up of each item. C. Verify that each piece of equipment or system has been checked for proper lubrication, drive rotation, belt tension, control sequence, or other conditions which may cause damage. D. Verify that tests, meter readings, and specified electrical characteristics agree with those required by the equipment or system manufacturer. E. Verify that wiring and support components for equipment are complete and tested. COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC 230500 -7 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  F. Execute start-up under supervision of responsible manufacturer’s representative in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions. G. When specified in individual Specification Sections, require manufacturer to provide authorized representative to be present at site to inspect, check, and approve equipment or system installation prior to start-up, and to supervise placing equipment or system in operation. H. Submit a written report that equipment or system has been properly installed and is functioning correctly. 1.16 FACTORY START-UP AND START-UP REPORTS A. Provide factory start-up of mechanical equipment listed below. Factory start-up shall be performed by a factory authorized representative of the equipment manufacturer. When factory start-up is successfully completed for each piece of mechanical equipment listed below, submit a formal start-up report to the Architect for approval. Start-up report shall be formatted in accordance with equipment manufacturer’s recommendations. Start-up report shall be typed, not hand written, and shall be submitted in a clean and legible form. B. Equipment requiring factory start-up 1. HVAC units 2. Variable Frequency Drives. 1.17 ADJUSTMENTS AND OWNER'S INSTRUCTIONS A. After completion of the installation work called for in the Contract Documents, furnish necessary mechanics or engineers for the adjustment and operation of the systems, to the end that the systems are perfectly adjusted and turned over to the Owner in perfect working order. Further instruct the Owner’s authorized representative in the care and operation of the installation, providing framed instruction charts, directions, and other related items. B. Instructors providing Owner training shall be experienced and familiar with the jobsite. 1.18 TESTING A. After the entire installation is completed and ready for operation, test the systems as outlined in Division 23 Section “Testing, Adjusting and Balancing for Mechanical Systems.” These tests are supplementary to detailed tests specified herein or directed. The Owner will provide water and electric current for the test. Provide necessary labor, test pump, gauges, meters, other instruments, and materials. Perform tests in the presence of the Architect or his representative. B. Perform other tests specified in individual Sections of this Specification. COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC 230500 -8 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  1.19 COMPLETION OF SYSTEMS A. The following mechanical systems shall not be complete until the following conditions are satisfied: 1. Ductwork Systems: a. Ductwork and related components and accessories shall be completely installed and insulated as specified. b. Ductwork leakage testing shall be completed and leakage testing reports shall be submitted and approved. c. Ductwork shall be balanced and a balancing report shall be submitted and approved. d. Commissioning shall be completed. 2. Piping Systems: a. Piping, valves and accessories shall be completely installed, insulated and labeled as specified. b. Piping pressure testing be completed and pressure testing reports shall be submitted and approved. c. Piping systems shall be balanced and a balancing report shall be submitted and approved. 3. Equipment: a. Equipment, including but not limited to boilers, heat exchangers, terminal heat transfer units, pumps, air handling units, condensing units, chillers, split system air conditioning equipment, and exhaust fans, shall be completely installed. b. Equipment start-up reports shall be completed, submitted and approved. c. Equipment balancing shall be completed and the balancing report shall be submitted and approved. d. Commissioning shall be completed. 4. Automatic Temperature Controls (ATC): a. ATC system shall be completely installed. b. Commissioning shall be completed. c. ATC system shall operate in an automatic mode for a minimum of 4 months during Owner occupancy without substantial deficiencies. COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC 230500 -9 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  1.20 OPERATING AND MAINTENANCE MANUALS A. Furnish 2 bound operating and maintenance manuals and forward to the Architect for review and transmittal to the Owner. B. For maintenance purposes, provide approved Submittals, parts lists, specifications, and manufacturer's maintenance bulletins for each piece of equipment. For materials used which have been submitted to the Architect for approval but do not require regular maintenance, such as piping, ductwork, and insulation, provide one copy of approved Submittals. C. Provide name, address and telephone number of the manufacturer’s representative and service company, for each piece of equipment or material so that service or spare parts can be readily obtained. 1.21 WARRANTY A. Provide guarantees and warranties for work under this Contract as indicated in the general requirements of the Contract. B. Provide manufacturers’ standard warranties and guarantees for work by the mechanical trades. However, such warranties and guarantees shall be in addition to and not in lieu of other liabilities which the manufacturer and the Mechanical Contractor may have by law or by other provisions of the Contract Documents. C. Guarantee that elements of the systems provided under this Contract are of sufficient capacity to meet the specified performance requirements as set forth in these Specifications or as indicated on the Drawings. D. Upon receipt of notice from the Owner of failure of any part of the mechanical systems or equipment during the warranty period, the Mechanical Subcontractor shall replace the affected part or parts. E. Furnish a written guarantee covering the above requirements before submitting the application for final payment. PART 2 -PRODUCTS (NOT USED) PART 3 -EXECUTION (NOT USED) END OF SECTION 230500 COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR HVAC 230500 -10 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  SECTION 230513 COMMON MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR HVAC EQUIPMENT PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SECTION INCLUDES A. Common requirements for electric motors furnished on equipment specified in other Sections, including single-phase and three-phase electric motors. B. Shaft Grounding Rings. C. Starters. D. Thermal Overload Protection. E. Belt Drives. F. Variable Speed Drives. 1.2 REFERENCES A. AFBMA 9 -Load Ratings and Fatigue Life for Ball Bearings. B. AFBMA 11 -Load Ratings and Fatigue Life for Roller Bearings. C. NEMA MG 1 -Motors and Generators. D. NFPA 70 -National Electrical Code. E. UL 508A -Industrial Control Panels. F. UL 674 -UL Standard for Safety Electric Motors and Generators for Use in Division 1 Hazardous (Classified) Locations. G. UL 1836 -UL Standard for Safety for Electric Motors for Use in Class I, Division 2 and Class II, Division 2 Hazardous (Classified) Locations. 1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Manufacturer's Qualifications: Company specializing in manufacturing the Products specified in this Section with minimum 3 years’ experience. B. Installer Qualifications: Company specializing in performing the work of this Section with minimum 3 years’ experience. 1.4 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS A. Conform to UL Component Recognition for appropriate sizes. COMMON MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR HVAC EQUIPMENT 230513 -1 B. Conform to NFPA 70 and local energy code. 1.5 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND PROTECTION A. Division 01 Section “Product Requirements”: Transport, handle, store, and protect products. B. Protect motors stored on site from weather and moisture by maintaining factory covers and suitable weather-proof covering. For extended outdoor storage, remove motors from equipment and store separately. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 MOTORS A. Acceptable Manufacturers: 1. A.O. Smith. 2. Baldor. 3. Emerson Motor Technologies. 4. General Electric. 5. Greenheck Fan Corporation. 6. Marathon Electric. 7. Siemens. 8. Teco-Westinghouse. 9. Toshiba. 10. U.S. Motors (division of Emerson Motor Technologies). 11. WEG. B. General Construction and Requirements: 1. Motors Less Than 250 Watts, for Intermittent Service: Equipment manufacturer’s standard and need not conform to these Specifications. 2. Motors shall have integral thermal overload protection. 3. Single Phase Motors for general applications: PSC (permanent split capacitor) where available. COMMON MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR HVAC EQUIPMENT 230513 -2 4. Single Phase Motors for fans: a. EC (electronically commutated) where available. b. PSC (permanent split capacitor) where available if EC is not available. 5. Open drip-proof type except where specifically noted otherwise. 6. Design for continuous operation in 40 degrees C environment. 7. Design for temperature rise in accordance with NEMA MG 1 limits for insulation class, service factor, and motor enclosure type. 8. Explosion-Proof Motors: UL approved for hazard classification. 9. Visible Nameplate: Indicating manufacturer’s name and model number, motor horsepower, RPM, frame size, voltage, phase, cycles, full load amps, insulation system class, service factor, maximum ambient temperature, temperature rise at rated horsepower, minimum efficiency. C. Inverter Duty: Motors for use with variable frequency drives shall be rated for “inverter duty”, with winding insulation rated for 1600 Volts and Class H (180 degrees C) temperature rating. D. Single-Phase Power for Fans -Electronically-Commutated (EC) Motors -Also Known As Brush-Free DC (BFDC) Motors: 1. Drive: Direct-drive only, not for use with belt drive. 2. Power Supply: Internal motor circuitry shall convert AC power supplied to DC power to operate the motor. 3. Turndown: Speed-controllable down to 20 percent of full speed (80 percent turndown). 4. Speed Control: Integral potentiometer with screwdriver setting, remote potentiometer dial with 24 VDC transformer to generate a 0-10 VDC signal, or integral circuitry to accept a 0-10 VDC signal from the building control system, as indicated and specified. 5. Efficiency: Minimum of 85 percent efficient at all speeds. 6. Soft-start type, capable of reliable start at any speed setting. 7. Enclosure: Open drip-proof. 8. Bearings: Permanently lubricated heavy duty ball bearings. COMMON MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR HVAC EQUIPMENT 230513 -3 9. Overload Protection: a. Automatic Speed Control: In the event of overheating or overloading, the motor electronics slow the motor to operate within its acceptable range. b. Thermal Overload: Internally fused, one-shot type as a last resort to prevent fires. c. Locked Rotor: If the motor sees a locked rotor condition, it will automatically shut itself down, then try to restart 3 times. After the 3rd try, the motor will not attempt to restart until the power is cycled. E. Single Phase Power -Permanent-split Capacitor Motors: 1. Starting Torque: Exceeding one fourth of full load torque. 2. Starting Current: Up to six times full load current. 3. Multiple Speed: Through tapped windings. 4. Open Drip-proof or Enclosed Air Over Enclosure: Class A (50 degrees C temperature rise) insulation, minimum 1.0 Service Factor, prelubricated sleeve or ball bearings, automatic reset overload protector. F. Single Phase Power -Capacitor Start Motors: 1. Starting Torque: Three times full load torque. 2. Starting Current: Less than five times full load current. 3. Pull-up Torque: Up to 350 percent of full load torque. 4. Breakdown Torque: Approximately 250 percent of full load torque. 5. Motors: Capacitor in series with starting winding; provide capacitor-start/capacitor-run motors with two capacitors in parallel with run capacitor remaining in circuit at operating speeds. 6. Drip-proof Enclosure: Class A (50° C temperature rise) insulation, NEMA Service Factor, prelubricated bearings. 7. Enclosed Motors: Class A (50° C temperature rise) insulation, 1.0 Service Factor, prelubricated ball bearings. G. Single Phase Power -Split Phase Motors: 1. Starting Torque: Less than 150 percent of full load torque. 2. Starting Current: Up to seven times full load current. 3. Breakdown Torque: Approximately 200 percent of full load torque. COMMON MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR HVAC EQUIPMENT 230513 -4 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  4. Drip-proof Enclosure: Class A (50° C temperature rise) insulation, NEMA Service Factor, prelubricated sleeve or ball bearings. 5. Enclosed Motors: Class A (50° C temperature rise) insulation, 1.0 Service Factor, prelubricated ball bearings. H. Three Phase Power -Squirrel-cage Motors: 1. Starting Torque: Between 1 and 1-1/2 times full load torque. 2. Starting Current: Six times full load current. 3. Power Output, Locked Rotor Torque, Breakdown or Pull Out Torque: NEMA Design B characteristics. 4. Design, Construction, Testing, and Performance: Conform to NEMA MG 1 for Design B energy-efficient motors. 5. Insulation System: NEMA Class B or better. 6. Motor Frames: NEMA Standard T-Frames of steel, aluminum, or cast iron with end brackets of cast iron or aluminum with steel inserts. 7. Bearings: Grease lubricated anti-friction ball bearings with housings equipped with plugged provision for relubrication, rated for minimum AFBMA 9, L-10 life of 200,000 hours. Calculate bearing load with NEMA minimum V-belt pulley with belt center line at end of NEMA standard shaft extension. Stamp bearing sizes on nameplate. 8. Sound Power Levels: To NEMA MG 1. 9. Part Winding Start Above 254T Frame Size: Use part of winding to reduce locked rotor starting current to approximately 60 percent of full winding locked rotor current while providing approximately 50 percent of full winding locked rotor torque. 10. Weatherproof Epoxy Sealed Motors: Epoxy seal windings using vacuum and pressure with rotor and starter surfaces protected with epoxy enamel; bearings double shielded with waterproof non-washing grease. 11. Nominal Efficiency: To NEMA MG 1, energy efficient for motor sizes 10 and larger. 2.2 SHAFT GROUNDING RINGS A. Manufacturers: 1. Electro Static Technology Inc. -Aegis SGR product line. 2. Inpro/Seal, a division of Waukesha Bearings Corporation -CDR product line. COMMON MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR HVAC EQUIPMENT 230513 -5 B. Provide shaft grounding rings (SGRs) on 3-phase motors 5 hp (3.7 kW) or larger which are intended to be used with variable-frequency drives (VFDs). The SGRs may be furnished by the motor manufacturer as an integral part of the motor, furnished factory-installed by the equipment manufacturer, or furnished for field installation by the equipment installer. C. Description: Circumferential micro-fiber ring with metal frame, designed to conduct VFD-induced bearing currents from the motor shaft to ground. Provides protection recommended in NEMA MG 1. Provide with mounting kit including bolts and bracket, or conductive epoxy to adhere to motor casing, to ensure ground connection from the SGR to the motor frame. D. Provide SGRs on at least one end of the motor. On motors above 100 hp (74.5 kW), provide a bearing insulation kit on the end of the motor without an SGR. 2.3 STARTERS AND OVERLOADS A. Acceptable Manufacturers: 1. Franklin Control Systems (division of Franklin Electric). 2. Allen-Bradley (division of Rockwell Automation). 3. Cutler Hammer (division of Eaton Corporation). 4. General Electric. 5. Siemens. 6. Square D (division of Schneider Electric). B. Provide motor starters for motors provided under this Division of these Specifications. C. Franklin Control Systems “BAS” building automation HVAC starters are the basis of design. Features of starters/contactors, disconnects, and temperature controls shall be combined in a single package using these starters. Coordination with Automatic Temperature Controls supplier and installer is required to reduce total project costs. 1. 3-phase starter features include: a. Multi-tap control power transformer (CPT) for universal control voltage. b. Motor circuit protector disconnect (MCP) with high interrupt rating and lockable operator handle. c. Contactors rated as high as 2.5 million electrical operations and 25 million mechanical operations. d. Anti-cycling feature. COMMON MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR HVAC EQUIPMENT 230513 -6 Bid Pack No2 e. Solid-state electronic overloads with wide adjustment range and highly accurate digital motor protection, including protection for phase loss, phase unbalance, stall and locked rotor conditions. Class 1-30. f. Digital keypad, featuring an H-O-A (Hand, Off, Auto) panel with large, clearly labeled push buttons including a front panel reset function and high-intensity LED indicators for settings. g. Damper and valve actuator control, to open the actuator before starting the fan or pump motor. h. Permissive auto control to disable auto inputs. Commonly used with a high pressure limit switch. i. Universal control inputs, including auto dry input, and wet input for voltages from 20 to 138 VAC or VDC. j. Power failure reset. k. Fireman’s override. l. NEMA 1 enclosure with prepunched knockouts. NEMA 3R, 4, 4X, and 12 as required. m. BACnet embedded communications option available. n. UL Listed assembly. o. 5-year warranty. p. Factory printed label or engraved nameplate, designating the equipment served. 2. Single-phase starter (Franklin Control Systems BAS-1P series) features include: a. Manually operated quick-make toggle mechanism lockable in the “Off” position, which shall also function as the motor disconnect. b. Hand/Auto switch, concealed behind sliding cover to discourage tampering. c. Capability to operate in both manual and automatic control modes. In automatic mode, the starter shall have the capability to integrate with a building automation system by providing terminals for run input, run status output, and fault output. d. Control terminals integrated in the starter. e. Power, run status, and fault LED pilot lights. f. Interposing run relay and current sensing status output relay. COMMON MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR HVAC EQUIPMENT 230513 -7 g. Voltage and dry inputs for auto run command. h. System override mode (fireman’s, occupancy, or manual). i. Solid-state electronic overload with wide adjustment range and highly accurate digital motor protection, including protection for stall and locked rotor conditions. Class 10. Concealed adjustment behind sliding cover. j. Surface mount enclosure, UL Type 1, single gang box installation, with sliding covers for concealed items. k. Power Input: 1-phase, 110-240 VAC, 1-16 Amps, 0.1-1 HP (75 to 745 W). l. Universal Control Inputs: Voltage auto-run 10-130 VAC/DC to energize. Dry auto-run normally-open dry contact closure. m. Control Outputs: Proof of run and fault, normally-open 0.3 Amps at 125 VAC, 1 Amp at 24 VAC. n. Ambient operating temperature -5 to 140 degrees F (-20 to 60 degrees C). o. UL 508A Listed. p. 5-year warranty. D. At Contractor’s option, Franklin Control Systems “EMS” energy management HVAC starters may be provided. Features of starters/contactors, disconnects, and temperature controls, and power metering, shall be combined in a single package using these starters. Coordination with Automatic Temperature Controls supplier and installer is required to reduce total project costs. Starter features include: 1. True power measurement with integrated current transformers (CTs) to detect belt loss and alert the building automation system. 2. Power metering, 1percent ANSI grade accuracy, with pulse/analog output of kW/kWh. Pulse output: normally-open contact, up to 45 V, up to 8 ohms resistance. Analog output of kW: 4-20 mA. LCD Display of kW and kWh. 3. BACnet embedded communications, RS-485 MS/TP half-duplex data transmission, with 30 points including metering value objects, binary value objects, multi-state objects, and analog value objects. 4. Multi-tap control power transformer (CPT) for universal control voltage. 5. Motor circuit protector disconnect (MCP) with high interrupt rating and lockable operator handle. 6. Contactors rated as high as 2.5 million electrical operations and 25 million mechanical operations. COMMON MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR HVAC EQUIPMENT 230513 -8 Bid Pack No2 7. Anti-cycling feature. 8. Solid-state electronic overloads with wide adjustment range and highly accurate digital motor protection, including protection for phase loss, phase unbalance, stall and locked rotor conditions. Class 1-60. 9. LCD 16-character 2-line display with backlight, plain English operation, with selectable readouts including power metering attributes and overload settings. 10. Digital keypad, featuring an H-O-A (Hand, Off, Auto) panel with large, clearly labeled push buttons including a front panel reset function and high-intensity LED indicators for settings. 11. Damper and valve actuator control, to open the actuator before starting the fan or pump motor. 12. Permissive auto control to disable auto inputs. Commonly used with a high pressure limit switch. 13. Fireman’s override. 14. Power failure reset. 15. NEMA 1 enclosure with prepunched knockouts. NEMA 3R, 4, 4X, and 12 as required. 16. Power Input: 3-phase, 200-600 VAC, 0.5-95 Amps, 1-200 HP (0.75 to 149 kW). 17. Universal Control Inputs: Voltage auto-run, and fireman’s override, 10-130 VAC/DC to energize. Dry auto-run, damper position switch, permissive auto, and shutdown, normally-open dry contact closure. 18. Control Outputs: Proof of run and fault, normally-open 0.3 Amps at 125 VAC, 1 Amp at 24 VAC. Damper and valve control, 1 Amp at 24 VAC (or 120 VAC). 19. Ambient operating temperature -5 to 140 degrees F (-20 to 60 degrees C). 20. UL Listed assembly. 21. 5-year warranty. 22. Factory printed label or engraved nameplate, designating the equipment served. E. Feature Descriptions: 1. Fireman’s Override Input: Causes the starter to run the motor in any mode (Hand, Off or Auto) regardless of other inputs or lack of inputs either manual or auto. The purpose of the Fireman’s Override input is to act as a smoke purge function. Fireman’s Override has priority over the Emergency Shutdown input. COMMON MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR HVAC EQUIPMENT 230513 -9 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  2. Emergency Shutdown Input: Disables the starter from operating in either Hand or Auto mode regardless of other inputs either manual or auto. 3. Phase Failure Protection: Initiates when phase loss is greater than 70 percent for 3 seconds or phase unbalance is greater than 50 percent for more than 5 seconds. 4. Cycling Fault Protection: Activates whenever the starter is cycled at a rate of more than 1000 cycles in a one hour period. This feature shall be selectable to be disabled. Cycling fault shall cause overload LED to blink rapidly. F. Contactors in starters shall be general purpose NEMA rated for connected H.P. (definite purpose starters not acceptable). Coordinate control voltage with Controls Contractor. Provide auxiliary contacts where required for interlocking of electrical equipment. Provide 2-speed motor starters where indicated or required. G. Single phase motors shall have one of the following factory wired methods of motor protection: 1. Integral thermal overload protection in motor and cord with plug and receptacle in unit casing. 2. Integral thermal overload protection in motor and disconnecting switch mounted in or on casing as specified with equipment. 3. Switch with thermal overload protection for unprotected motors with switch serving as disconnect device. H. For starters associated with equipment that is required to be shut down upon a fire alarm condition, provide input contacts within the starter enclosure to interface with the building’s fire alarm system. Upon receipt of a signal from the building’s fire alarm system, power to load side of the starter shall be turned off. Circuitry shall be provided to ensure that power is off whether the starter is in the “AUTO”, “HAND” or “BYPASS” mode. If this feature is not available from the starter manufacturer, provide a contactor on the line side of the starter to accomplish the same function. The contactor shall meet the requirements of Division 26. 2.4 V-BELT DRIVES A. Provide self-aligning roller-bearings mounted in sealed housings with grease fittings and grease overflow valves. Fan wheels and shafts shall be designed for critical speed at least 20 percent higher than the maximum fan speed. The assembled fan shall be statically and dynamically balanced at the factory. Bearings shall be certified to have an average life per AFBMA of not less than 200,000 hours. B. The drive base shall be constructed to allow adjustment of belt tension without having to loosen motor hold-down bolts. COMMON MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR HVAC EQUIPMENT 230513 -10 C. Cast iron or steel sheaves, dynamically balanced, bored to fit shafts, and keyed. Matched belts, and drive rated as recommended by manufacturer or minimum 1.5 times nameplate rating of the motor. 1. Provide adjustable-sheave belt drives for motors, except as otherwise specified in individual Sections of the Specifications. 2. Sheaves on motors 25 hp (18.6 kW) and over shall be fixed type. 2.5 VARIABLE FREQUENCY DRIVES A. Acceptable Manufacturers: 1. ABB (ACH550 Series) (basis of design). 2. Franklin Control Systems (division of Franklin Electric) (P-Series). 3. Danfoss (VLT FC-100 Series). 4. Rockwell Automation (Allen-Bradley). 5. Toshiba (Q7 Series). 6. Yaskawa (E7 Series). 7. No substitutions. B. The variable frequency drives (VFDs) with options shall be UL listed as a complete assembly and shall be built in compliance with the latest standards of ANSI, IEEE, NEMA and the National Electric Code. C. The VFDs shall be designed to meet the requirements of the following standards: IEC801-2, IEC801-4, IEC255-4. D. Quality Assurance: 1. Manufacturer: Shall specialize in manufacture, assembly, and field performance of VFDs with minimum 5 years’ experience. 2. The VFD manufacturer shall have an existing representative, exclusively for HVAC applications, an independent service and start-up organization, and a parts stocking depot local to the installation. E. Warranty and Start-Up Service: 1. Start-Up Service: The VFD manufacturer shall provide a start-up service package. Service shall include inspection, final adjustment, operational checks, coordination with interface to building’s ATC system and a final report for record purpose. Start-up service shall be performed by a factory approved and certified technician. COMMON MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR HVAC EQUIPMENT 230513 -11 2. Report: Submit a report of start-up and initial settings and readings. 3. Owner Training: Provide a session of at least 4 hours, to train 2 or more of the Owner’s representatives in the operation and maintenance of the drives. Schedule the training at the Owner’s convenience within normal working hours, within 2 months after Substantial Completion. 4. Warranty: For a period of 2 years after factory start-up, the VFD manufacturer shall include a full parts and labor on-site warranty at no additional cost. F. Construction: 1. Pulse Width Modulated design converting the fixed utility voltage and frequency to a variable voltage and frequency output. The VFD shall employ a full wave bridge rectifier, DC bus choke, DC bus filter capacitors, and Insulated Gate Bipolar Transistors (IGBTs) as the output switching device. SCRs, GTOs and Darlington transistors are not acceptable. The drive efficiency shall be 97 percent or better at full speed and full load. Fundamental power factor shall be 0.98 at all speeds and loads. 2. 6-pulse (minimum) converter section. 3. NEMA 1 ABS plastic or metal enclosure. Verify suitability of this enclosure for the application and provide suitable enclosures either instead of or in addition to the basic enclosure. 4. Standard operating conditions are: a. Incoming AC power at building power system design’s phase and voltage (see Contract Drawings) ±10 percent, 60 Hz. Output voltage, phase and frequencies compatible with equipment served (see Contract Drawings). b. Humidity 0 to 95 percent (noncondensing and noncorrosive). c. Altitude 0 to 3,300 feet above sea level, without derating. d. Ambient temperature 0 to 40 degrees C. e. Verify actual operating conditions, and derate drive capacity as required. 5. VFDs shall include the following features: a. Customer interface, including digital display in plain English (code numbers are not acceptable), keypad and customer connections. b. Carrier (Switching) Frequency: Optimized for a 3 kHz or 4 kHz carrier frequency to reduce motor noise. The carrier frequency shall be adjustable by the start-up technician, in a range at least as low as 1 kHz and as high as 8 kHz. Provide at least the following settings to allow fine tuning: 1 kHz, 4 kHz, and 8 kHz. COMMON MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR HVAC EQUIPMENT 230513 -12 Bid Pack No2 c.  Built-in program to automatically vary the carrier (switching) frequency. Acceptable types of control include:  1)  ABB’s switching frequency foldback control, reduces heat generated by the IGBTs by reducing the carrier frequency if the heatsink temperature rises above 176-194 degrees F (80-90 degrees C).  2)  Danfoss automatic switching frequency modulation, reduces noise at low loads (below 60 percent) by adjusting the carrier frequency up to a selected maximum, and provides maximum power and efficiency at higher loads by adjusting the carrier frequency downward to a more efficient setting.  d.  The option of either (1) displaying a fault, (2) running at a preset speed, or (3) running at the last known speed (average of last 10 seconds) if the input reference (4-20mA or 2-10V) is lost.  e.  Automatic restart after an overcurrent, overvoltage, or undervoltage, or loss of input signal protective trip. The number of restart attempts and trial time shall be programmable.  f.  The ability to start into a rotating load (forward or reverse) and accelerate or decelerate without safety tripping or component damage (flying start).  g.  Automatic power loss ride through circuit that will utilize the inertia of the load to keep the drive powered. Minimum power loss ride through shall be 1 cycle based on full load and no inertia.  h.  Isolated power for control circuits.  i.  Input line fuses.  j.  Acceptable start/stop commands shall include closure of a contact or switch, application and removal of input power and optional application and removal of 115 VAC on-off signal.  k.  Load loss detection. Each VFD shall provide a dry contact closure at a field adjustable load threshold to indicate a loss of motor load (for example, broken fan belt or pump cavitation).  l.  Pilot light cluster to provide visual indication of protective functions and circuit status, including the following LEDs:  1)  Power on (Red): Illuminates when main power is applied to the controller.  2)  AFC Run (Green): Illuminates to annunciate a drive run condition.  3)  AFC Fault (Yellow): Illuminates to annunciate a fault condition.  COMMON MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR HVAC EQUIPMENT 230513 -13 Bid Pack No2 m. Five programmable critical frequency lockout ranges to prevent the VFD from continuously operating at an unstable speed. n. PI setpoint controller integral to the drive, allowing a pressure or flow signal to be connected to the VFD, using the VFD for the closed loop control, eliminating the need for external controllers. o. Three programmable digital relay outputs, rated for maximum switching current 8 amps at 24 VDC and 0.4 amps at 250 VAC; Maximum voltage 300 VDC and 250 VAC; continuous current rating 2 amps RMS. p. Seven programmable preset speeds. q. Six programmable digital inputs for interface with energy management system. r. Two independently adjustable acceleration and deceleration ramps, adjustable from 1 to 1800 seconds. s. Ramp or coast to a stop. t. Two programmable analog outputs to provide 4-20 ma signals linear to output frequency, motor speed, output current, motor torque, motor power, DC bus voltage, and motor voltage. 6. VFD door mounted operator digital display shall include: a. Output Frequency b. Motor Speed (RPM) c. Motor Current d. Calculated Motor Torque e. Calculated Motor Power f. DC Bus Voltage g. Output Voltage h. Heat Sink Temperature i. Analog Input Values j. Keypad Reference Values k. Elapsed Time Meter COMMON MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR HVAC EQUIPMENT 230513 -14 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  7. VFD speed command input shall include: a. Keypad. b. Two analog inputs, each capable of accepting a 0-20 mA, 4-20mA, 0-10V, and 2-10V signal inputs isolated from ground, and programmable via the keypad for different uses. Inputs shall have a programmable filter to remove any oscillation of the reference signal. The filter shall be adjustable from 0.01 to 10 seconds. The input shall be able to be inverted, so that minimum reference corresponds to maximum speed, and maximum reference corresponds to minimum speed. c. Floating point input to accept a three wire input from a Dwyer Photohelic gauge or equivalent type instrument. d. RS-485 communications. 8. The VFD shall include the following protection circuits. In the case of a protective trip, the drive shall stop, and announce the fault condition in plain words. a. Overcurrent trip, 200 percent of the VFD’s variable torque current rating. b. Overvoltage trip, 130 percent of the VFD’s rated voltage. c. Undervoltage trip, 60 percent of the VFD’s rated voltage. d. Over temperature, + 70 degrees C. e. Ground fault. f. Adaptable Electronic Motor Overload Protection: Shall protect the motor based on speed, load curve, and external fan parameter. Circuits that protect the motor only at full speed are unacceptable. g. Power line surge protection by means of a metal oxide varistor (m.o.v.). 9. Accessories to be furnished and mounted by the drive manufacturer and contained in a single enclosure (the use of more than one enclosure is not acceptable): a. Protection From Harmonics and Voltage Spikes: Provide one of the following: 1) Line Reactors: 3-percent AC input line reactors to reduce harmonic current distortion to the incoming power line, and to provide some protection to the drive from incoming voltage spikes. Provide reactors in each phase of incoming power to each VFD. Install between the input power and the drive’s input bridge rectifier (so they protect the rectifier). The line reactor shall provide attenuation of line side voltage transients, thus preventing overvoltage trips or other COMMON MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR HVAC EQUIPMENT 230513 -15 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  2) 3) unnecessary VFD shutdowns and providing a reduction in harmonic current distortion. Line reactors shall be manufactured by TCI of Milwaukee, WI and must meet the following requirements: provide a minimum of 2-1/2 percent line impedance, have a saturation rating of no less than 2.5 times the continuous current rating, and be UL recognized. ABB Design: Integral 5 percent swinging chokes in the AC input lines, configured between the input power and the drive’s input bridge rectifier (so they protect the rectifier from spikes in input power). a) The swinging choke is an inductor with an inductance value inversely proportional to its operating current. Over a substantial portion of the normal operating current range, the inductance decreases as the current in the choke increases. A conventional or linear choke has a fixed inductance value that changes very little as the operating current varies in the normal operating range. b) The harmonic limiting effectiveness of the swinging choke increases when the operating point is less than maximum power. c) Compared to a standard linear choke, the swinging choke provides superior line harmonic current reduction when the drive’s output power is less than or equal to rated output. d) The effective inductance value of a swinging choke at full load is higher than the value of a linear choke of the same physical size. e) The efficiency of a swinging choke is higher than the efficiency of a linear choke of the same inductance value. f) Since the design point BHP is nearly always less than the nameplate horsepower of the selected motor, with swinging chokes the harmonic contribution of the drive will nearly always be less than that at maximum rated output power. g) See U.S. Patent No. 6,774,758, “Low harmonic rectifier circuit” using non-linear inductor(s). Danfoss Design: Harmonic suppression and surge suppression integral to the drive using separate components. a) Harmonic Suppression: DC link chokes (inductors) installed between the drive’s input bridge rectifier and the inverter bus capacitor, consisting of a dual, 5 percent DC-link reactor on the positive and negative rails of the DC bus. This reactor reduces the level of harmonics reflected back into the building power COMMON MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR HVAC EQUIPMENT 230513 -16 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  system without causing a voltage loss at the drive’s input and improves input power factor. The reactor is non-saturating (linear) to provide full harmonic filtering throughout the entire load range. In performance, the harmonic suppression of the DC-link reactor is equivalent to a 5 percent AC line reactor. b) Incoming Power-Line Surge Suppression: Fast-acting Metal Oxide Varistor (or (MOV) installed between the input power and the drive’s input bridge rectifier, Zener diodes and oversized DC bus capacitors to provide protection against high potential spikes. When the voltage exceeds 2.3 times the expected incoming voltage for 1.3 milliseconds, the MOV shorts, protecting the internal parts of the drive including the 3-phase full-wave diode bridge. The reactor also acts to reduce input current caused by power line disturbances. Provide 4 MOVs, one on each of the 3 inputs and one attached to the DC Link. Comply with the German specification for surge suppression (VDE 0160). 4) Linear chokes or DC link chokes used alone without surge suppression on the incoming power are NOT acceptable as alternatives to line reactors. If they are standard and integral to the VFD, they may be provided in addition to line reactors. b. Bypass: Manual transfer to line power via contactors and including class 20 bimetal motor thermal overload relays and fuse or circuit breaker protection while in bypass operation, with automatic bypass capability. 1) Provide bypass on drives which serve single non-redundant motors, such as fan motors in air handling units and air conditioning units. 2) Bypass is not required on drives which serve one of a pair of matching and fully-redundant motors with individual drive per motor (such as a pair of pumps where one is the lead pump and one is a 100 percent backup, and each pump has its own VFD). c. Service switch which provides the ability to service the controller (electrically isolated while in bypass operation) without having to remove power to motor. d. Hand-off automatic switch (HOA), prewired. The HOA switch shall be operable in both the Normal and Bypass (if provided) modes of operation. The switch may be dial type, or momentary-contact pushbutton type with LED indicator lights. The switch may be integral to the standard VFD keypad, if it is a dedicated physical switch that is always available, but it is not allowed to serve any other functions, and it may not be a virtual switch such as on a touchscreen. 1) When Auto mode is selected, the external start command and external reference speed signal shall control the motor. COMMON MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR HVAC EQUIPMENT 230513 -17 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  2) When Hand mode is selected, the motor shall run and the manual potentiometer shall control the motor speed. Other controls and inputs/outputs shall function as in Auto mode. e. Manual potentiometer, dial type with calibrated nameplate. Provide an analog (dial-type) or digital meter to indicate selected speed. 1) If the HOA switch is a dedicated button integral to the VFD keypad, and the potentiometer function is immediately available without any further steps when the HOA is in “Hand” position (such as up-down pushbuttons on the face of the keypad), the potentiometer may be integral to the standard VFD keypad. The speed meter may be a display on the general display screen. f. Customer Interlock Terminal Strip -provide a separate terminal strip for connection of fire, smoke, freeze contacts and external start command. External interlocks and start/stop contacts shall function with drive in hand, auto or bypass. g. Door interlocked disconnect or circuit breaker, padlockable in off position. h. For drives that control fans or pumps which are specified to operate in an automatic lead/lag arrangement, provide automatic alternation device in VFD enclosure. (coordinate with Division 23 Section “Instrumentation and Controls for Mechanical Systems”). 10. Energy Management System Interface a. Drive shall have the capability to be controlled and monitored via analog and digital inputs and outputs. b. In addition to analog and digital I/O the VFD shall be capable of communicating with the following controls companies’ communication buses with no extra hardware: 1) Siemens Controls c. Drive shall have integral capability to be controlled and monitored through BACnet, LonWorks, Modbus, or other serial communication protocol compatible with the building automatic temperature control system. Provide adapter modules as required. d. Coordinate with suppliers and installers of building automatic temperature control system to ensure compatibility and full functionality. See Division 23 Section “Instrumentation and Controls for Mechanical Systems.” 11. In the event of a power failure and upon restoration of power, the variable frequency drive shall remain responsive to its command signal from the building’s energy management/temperature control system. The drive shall not require COMMON MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR HVAC EQUIPMENT 230513 -18 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  manual resetting after a power outage in order to respond to the energy management/temperature control system’s command signal. 12. For drives that are associated with equipment that is required to be shut down upon a fire alarm condition, provide input contacts within the VFD enclosure to interface with the building’s fire alarm system. Upon receipt of a signal from the building’s fire alarm system, power to load side of the VFD shall be turned off. Circuitry shall be provided to ensure that power is off whether the VFD is in the “AUTO”, “HAND” or “BYPASS” mode. If this feature is not available from the VFD manufacturer, provide a contactor on the line side of the VFD to accomplish the same function. The contactor shall meet the requirements of the Electrical Division of the Specifications. 13. Occasional input and output power circuit switching shall be able to be accomplished without interlocks or damage to the drive. If drive design cannot tolerate interruption of output, such as by a disconnect switch mounted between the drive and the motor, provide protective devices and coordinate with installers to protect the drive as specified in Part 3 – Execution in this Section. G. Compliance with IEEE-519: 1. Input Line Reactors: Provide as specified in “Construction” paragraph of this Section. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 INSTALLATION A. Division 01 Section “Quality Requirements”: Manufacturer’s instructions. B. Install securely on firm foundation. Mount ball bearing motors with shaft in any position. C. Coordinate with Division 26 “Electrical.” D. Check line voltage and phase and direction of rotation and ensure agreement with nameplate. E. Install guards in accordance with Codes and OSHA requirements. F. Adjust motor overload devices based on motor amperage ratings and field measurements of running amps, to ensure protection of the motor and eliminate nuisance trips. G. Disconnect Switch Mounting Height: Install at height above finished floor in accordance with NFPA 70. 1. In most instances, the center of the grip of the disconnect switch operating handle in its highest position shall be no more than 79 inches (2.0 m) above finished floor or working platform. COMMON MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR HVAC EQUIPMENT 230513 -19 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  2. Switches and circuit breakers installed adjacent to the equipment served (and within 79 inches (2.0 m) above finished floor or working platform. H. Variable Frequency Drives: 1. Mounting Height: a. Install with the disconnect switch height in accordance with NFPA 70, as described in the paragraph “Disconnect Switch Mounting Height” in this Section. b. The VFD shall be considered to be a piece of equipment served by its disconnect switch, for purposes of NFPA 70, unless otherwise indicated, or otherwise directed by the Authority Having Jurisdiction or by the Owner. 1) If the motor served by the VFD is within sight of the VFD, and within 50 feet (15.2 m) measured in a straight line, this disconnect switch may also serve the motor unless otherwise indicated. c. When possible, install VFDs with their operator-interface display at 79 inches (2.0 m) or less above finished floor, unless otherwise indicated or directed. 1) To restrict unauthorized access, VFDs in locations accessible to the public (such as but not limited to classrooms, unrestricted storage rooms, and corridors) shall be mounted with the disconnect switch at 72 to 79 inches (1.8 to 2.0 m) above finished floor, with the VFD operator display and other accessories mounted above the disconnect switch, where ceiling height allows, unless otherwise indicated. 2) In mechanical rooms and other restricted-access locations, mount VFDs at a height for greatest user convenience. d. When possible, mount groups of adjacent VFDs with tops at uniform height above finished floor. e. Because VFDs produce heat, do not install a VFD above another one, or above another heat-producing device. Do not install a VFD below or too near to any heat-sensitive device or room temperature sensor. Provide ventilation space and other means of cooling as required by the manufacturer. f. Install with service and installation clearances as required by the manufacturer. COMMON MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR HVAC EQUIPMENT 230513 -20 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  2. Electrical Connections: a. Provide separate metal conduits for drive input power, output power to the motor, and control wiring. Output motor cables from multiple drives shall be run separately. b. Ground each drive separately. c. Ensure that a fused disconnect switch is provided upstream between the transformer and the drive. Fuses are required because they are faster-acting than circuit breakers. d. If drive design cannot tolerate interruption of output, such as by a disconnect switch mounted between the drive and the motor, provide protective devices and coordinate with installers to protect the drive, and coordinate with installers to ensure that no unnecessary switching is installed. 1) When the VFD is out of sight from the equipment served or is more than 50 feet (15.2 m) from the equipment served, a disconnect switch mounted on or adjacent to the equipment is generally required in Division 26 “Electrical” or by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. If such a disconnect or other switching device is indicated or required, provide protective devices as required by the VFD manufacturer. Such devices typically include an “early-break” auxiliary set of contacts or a “Stop” button on the disconnect switch, field-wired to the VFD’s external fault input or stop input, so that if the switch is opened while the VFD is running, the input will shut off the output of the VFD. The VFD stop method must be set to “Coast.” Provide field wiring in conduit. 2) Provide engraved nameplates at disconnect switches and other devices, instructing users on the proper operation of these devices to prevent damage to the VFD. 3. Carrier Frequency: Adjust to minimize noise, but also to minimize the potential for motor bearing damage due to VFD-induced shaft voltage. a. VFDs convert line AC voltage to a pulse width modulated (PWM) AC voltage of variable frequency. The switching frequency of these pulses is referred to as the “carrier frequency.” The switching induces a voltage on the rotor shaft, which, if it builds up to a sufficient level, can discharge as “bearing current” to ground through the bearings. This has an electric discharge machining (EDM) effect, causing pitting of the bearing’s rolling elements and raceways. This effect can be minimized by proper setup. b. The higher the carrier frequency, the higher the rate of the current discharge pulses, and the more likely EDM will occur. At higher carrier frequencies the VFD will generally run quieter; however, it becomes more destructive on the motor insulation and bearings. COMMON MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR HVAC EQUIPMENT 230513 -21 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  c. Adjust the carrier frequency as low as possible without creating unacceptable audible noise levels, and to avoid frequencies above 6 kHz altogether if possible. 4. Coordinate with building controls systems as specified in Part 2 of this Section. 5. Perform startup service and submit report. 6. Provide warranty service. 7. Provide Owner training. END OF SECTION 230513 COMMON MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR HVAC EQUIPMENT 230513 -22 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  SECTION 230516 EXPANSION FITTINGS AND LOOPS FOR HVAC PIPING PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SECTION INCLUDES A. Flexible pipe connectors. B. Pipe anchors and alignment guides. C. Pre-fabricated flexible expansion loops. 1.2 REFERENCES A. MIL-E-17814E -Expansion Joints, Pipe, Slip-Type, Packed. 1.3 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. Provide structural work and equipment required to control expansion and contraction of piping. Verify that anchors, guides, and expansion loops provided adequately protect system. B. Expansion Calculations: 1. Installation Temperature: 50 degrees F (10 degrees C). 2. Hot Water Heating: 200 degrees F (99 degrees C). 3. Safety Factory: 30 percent. 1.4 SUBMITTALS A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Submittal Procedures.” B. Product Data: 1. Flexible Pipe Connectors: Indicate maximum temperature and pressure rating, face-to-face length, live length, hose wall thickness, hose convolutions per foot (meter) and per assembly, fundamental frequency of assembly, braid structure, and total number of wires in braid. C. Design Data: Indicate selection calculations. D. Manufacturer's Installation Instructions: Indicate special procedures, and external controls. EXPANSION FITTINGS AND LOOPS FOR HVAC PIPING 230516 -1 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  1.5 PROJECT RECORD DOCUMENTS A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Project Record Documents.” B. Record actual locations of flexible pipe connectors, expansion loops, anchors, and guides. 1.6 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE DATA A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Operation and Maintenance Data.” B. Maintenance Data: Include adjustment instructions. 1.7 QUALIFICATIONS A. Manufacturer: Company specializing in manufacturing the products specified in this Section with minimum 3 years’ experience. B. Design expansion compensating system under direct supervision of a Professional Engineer experienced in design of this work and licensed at the place where the project is located. 1.8 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Deliver, store, protect and handle products to site under provisions of Division 01. B. Accept expansion loops on site in factory packing with shipping bars and positioning devices intact. Inspect for damage. C. Protect equipment from exposure by leaving factory coverings, pipe end protection, and packaging in place until installation. 1.9 WARRANTY A. Provide warranty under provisions of Division 01 Section “Closeout Procedures.” PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 DOUBLE-SPHERE FLEXIBLE PIPE CONNECTORS A. Application: Provide Double-Sphere type wherever flexible connectors are indicated or specified, except in locations where other types specified. B. Piping 3/4 inch to 1-1/2 inch (19 mm to 38 mm): 1. Manufacturers: a. Metraflex. b. American Wheatley. are specifically detailed or EXPANSION FITTINGS AND LOOPS FOR HVAC PIPING 230516 -2 c. Flex-Hose Co. d. Mason Industries -see “Single-Sphere Flexible Pipe Connectors”. e. Proco Products, Inc. f. Twin City Hose, Inc. 2. Hose: Neoprene inner and outer with nylon tire cord fabric reinforcing. 3. Control Cables: Provide if recommended by Manufacturer, with installed length slack at neutral installation to prevent vibration transmission. Cable shall be taut only when the connector exceeds maximum allowable extension. 4. Pressure Rating: 150 psig WOG and 220 degrees F at 70 degrees F (room temperature. Vacuum rating 16 in. Hg. 5. Joint: Galvanized steel female unions. 6. Size: Use pipe sized units. 7. Allowable Movements: 0.87 inch (22 mm) axial compression, 0.23 inch (6 mm) axial elongation, 0.87 inch (22 mm) transverse movement on each side of installed center line, 17.5 degrees angular movement. C. Piping 2 inch to 12 inch (50 mm to 304 mm): 1. Manufacturers: a. Mason Industries. b. American Wheatley. c. Flex-Hose Co. d. Metraflex. e. Proco Products, Inc. (up to 6 inch (75 mm) size). f. Twin City Hose, Inc. (up to 6 inch (75 mm) size). 2. Hose: Neoprene or EPDM inner and outer, with nylon or Kevlar tire cord fabric reinforcing. 3. Control Cables: Provide if recommended by Manufacturer, with installed length slack at neutral installation to prevent vibration transmission. Cable shall be taut only when the connector exceeds maximum allowable extension. 4. Pressure Rating: 150 psig (1035 kPa) WOG and 220 degrees F (104 degrees C), at 70 degrees F (21 degrees C) room temperature. Vacuum rating 16 in. Hg (54 kPa). EXPANSION FITTINGS AND LOOPS FOR HVAC PIPING 230516 -3 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  5. Joint: 150 psig (1035 kPa) floating flanges; ductile iron with baked enamel finish, or steel. 6. Size: Use pipe sized unit. 7. Allowable Movements, 2 inch (50 mm) to 2-1/2 inch (63 mm) Size: 3/4 inch (19 mm) axial compression, 5/8 inch (15 mm) axial elongation, 5/8 inch (15 mm) transverse movement on each side of installed center line, 27 degrees angular movement. 8. Allowable Movements, 3 inch (75 mm) Size and Up: 1-1/8 inch (28 mm) axial compression, 7/8 inch (22 mm) axial elongation, 7/8 inch (22 mm) transverse movement on each side of installed center line, 20 degrees angular movement. 2.2 SINGLE-SPHERE FLEXIBLE PIPE CONNECTORS A. Piping 3/4 inch to 1-1/2 inch (19 mm to 38 mm) (not allowed for larger piping): 1. Manufacturers: a. Mason Industries. b. No Substitutions. 2. Hose: EPDM with Kevlar tire cord fabric reinforcing. 3. Pressure Rating: 150 psig (1035 kPa) WOG and 220 degrees F (104 degrees C), at 70 degrees F (21 degrees C) room temperature. Vacuum rating 16 inch. Hg (54 kPa). 4. Joint: Ductile iron floating flanges with baked enamel finish, with female threaded fittings for steel pipe, or sweat-end fittings for copper pipe. 5. Size: Provide pipe sized units. 6. Allowable Movements: 3/4 inch (19 mm) axial compression, 3/8 inch (10 mm) axial elongation, 3/8 inch (10 mm) transverse movement on each side of installed center line, 22 degrees angular movement. B. Single-sphere connectors conforming with these specifications may be used where double-sphere types are indicated. 2.3 BRAIDED-HOSE FLEXIBLE PIPE CONNECTORS A. Braided-hose flexible pipe connectors shall be used in refrigerant piping and at chilled water connections to outdoor chillers only. They are not allowed in other hydronic piping. EXPANSION FITTINGS AND LOOPS FOR HVAC PIPING 230516 -4 Barnstead School District, SAU 86 Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations Bid Pack No2  May 20, 2025 TTG Proj No. 5199  B.  Steel Piping:  1. Manufacturers: a. Metraflex. b. Amber-Booth. c. Flex-Hose Co. d. Mason Industries. e. Twin City Hose, Inc. 2. Inner Hose: Stainless Steel. 3. Exterior Sleeve: Double braided stainless steel. 4. Pressure Rating: 200 psig (1380 kPa) WOG and 250 degrees F (121 degrees C), at 70 degrees F (21 degrees C) room temperature. 5. Joint: As specified for pipe joints. 6. Size: Use pipe sized units. 7. Maximum offset: 3/4 inch (20 mm) on each side of installed center line. C. Copper Piping: 1. Manufacturers: a. Metraflex. b. Amber-Booth. c. Flex-Hose Co. d. Mason Industries. e. Twin City Hose, Inc. 2. Inner Hose: Bronze. 3. Exterior Sleeve: Braided bronze. 4. Pressure Rating: 200 psig (1380 kPa) WOG and 250 degrees F (121 degrees C), at 70 degrees F (21 degrees C) room temperature. 5. Joint: As specified for pipe joints. 6. Size: Use pipe sized unit. EXPANSION FITTINGS AND LOOPS FOR HVAC PIPING 230516 -5 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  7. Maximum offset: 3/4 inch (20 mm) on each side of installed center line. 2.4 PRE-FABRICATED FLEXIBLE EXPANSION LOOPS A. Manufacturers: 1. Metraflex “METRALOOP”. 2. Flex-Hose “TRI-FLEX LOOP”. 3. Mason Industries “EQUI-V”. 4. No substitutions. B. Provide flexible expansion loops of diameter and material consistent with the pipe system in which they are to be installed. Flexible loops shall be designed to impart no thrust loads on the anchors. At a minimum, the loop shall consist of 2 flexible sections of hose and braid, two 90 degree elbows, and a 180 degree turn. If Mason Industries “EQUI-V” connectors are used, the elbows shall be two 60 degree elbows and a 120 degree turn. 1. Joint: As specified for pipe joints. 2. Size: Use pipe sized units. 3. Nesting: Where nesting is indicated or required, provide extended lengths of the 180-degree turn as required. 4. Shipping Bars: Remove after installation. C. Flexible Sections in Steel Piping: 1. Inner Hose: Stainless Steel. 2. Exterior Sleeve: Double braided stainless steel. 3. Pressure Rating: 200 psig (1380 kPa) WOG and 250 degrees F (121 degrees C), at 70 degrees F (21 degrees C) room temperature. D. Flexible Sections in Copper Piping: 1. Inner Hose: Bronze. 2. Exterior Sleeve: Braided bronze. 3. Pressure Rating: 200 psig (1380 kPa) WOG and 250 degrees F (121 degrees C), at 70 degrees F (21 degrees C) room temperature. E. Polypropylene Piping: Prefabricated expansion loops designed for use in metal piping require large forces for deflection, and so are not suitable for use with polypropylene piping. If polypropylene piping is used, provide field-fabricated EXPANSION FITTINGS AND LOOPS FOR HVAC PIPING 230516 -6 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  expansion loops. Submit loop sizing for each location, in accordance with the piping manufacturer’s recommendations. 2.5 FLEXIBLE HOSE ASSEMBLIES A. If a piping connection is indicated or specified as a “flexible connection”, this Section applies. B. For flexible hoses such as “heat pump hoses” which may be indicated at items of equipment including water-source heat pumps, fan-coil units, and chilled beams, see Division 23 Section “Hydronic Specialties.” 2.6 ACCESSORIES A. Pipe Alignment Guides: 1. Manufacturers: a. Metraflex. b. Hyspan. c. Flexonics. d. Carpenter & Paterson. 2. 2-piece welded steel with enamel paint, bolted, with spider to fit standard pipe, frame with 4 mounting holes, clearance for minimum 1 inch (25 mm) thick insulation, minimum 3 inch (75 mm) travel. B. Pipe Anchors: 1. Manufacturers: a. Metraflex. b. Hyspan. c. Flexonics. d. Carpenter & Paterson. 2. Provide structural I-Beam anchors equal to METRAFLEX PAI series, sizes as required. C. Provide miscellaneous steel for anchors and guides. EXPANSION FITTINGS AND LOOPS FOR HVAC PIPING 230516 -7 PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 INSTALLATION A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Construct spool pieces to exact size of flexible connection for future insertion. C. Install flexible pipe connectors on pipes connected to equipment supported by vibration isolation and on pipes connected to base mounted pumps, chillers, air handling units, unit ventilators, fan coil units and as indicated. Provide line size flexible connectors. D. Install flexible connectors at right angles to displacement (generally parallel to fan or pump shaft). Install one end immediately adjacent to isolated equipment and anchor other end. Install in horizontal plane unless indicated otherwise. E. Rigidly anchor pipe to building structure. Provide pipe guides so movement is directed along axis of pipe only. Erect piping such that strain and weight is not on cast connections or apparatus. F. Provide support and equipment required to control expansion and contraction of piping. Provide loops, pipe offsets, and swing joints where indicated. G. Where flexible grooved couplings are indicated instead of flexible connectors at pumps and other equipment, provide minimum 1 flexible joint per inch (25 mm) pipe diameter. Grooved piping does not require anchoring at equipment. Submit coupling manufacturer’s design recommendations for quantity and location of flexible couplings at each location. H. Provide expansion loops as indicated on Drawings. I. Pre-fabricated flexible expansion loops shall be installed in a neutral, pre.compressed, or pre-extended condition as required for the application. Loops installed hanging down shall have a drain plug. Loops shall not be installed straight up or at any angle above the horizontal plane, but in the event that the Architect’s approval is given to install loops above the horizontal plane, loops shall be fitted with an automatic air release valve to purge air from the high point of the loop. Loops installed in any position other than hanging down shall have the 180 degree return supported. Install pre-fabricated flexible expansion loop within 4 pipe diameters, both upstream and downstream, from a pipe guide or anchor. 1. Guides and Anchors: The Mechanical Contractors Association of America “Guidelines for Quality Piping Installations” section 3 -Pipe Hangers and Supports recommends guides on both sides of the expansion loops. Although some loop manufacturers say their loops don’t require guides, it is required to provide guides as indicated and as specified. The intent is to direct pipe movement and to reduce stress on hangers. EXPANSION FITTINGS AND LOOPS FOR HVAC PIPING 230516 -8 3.2 MANUFACTURER'S FIELD SERVICES A. Prepare and start systems under provisions of Division 01 Section “Quality Requirements.” B. Provide inspection services by flexible pipe manufacturer's representative for final installing. Certify installation is in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations and connectors are performing satisfactorily. END OF SECTION 230516 EXPANSION FITTINGS AND LOOPS FOR HVAC PIPING 230516 -9 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  SECTION 230517 SLEEVES AND ESCUTCHEONS FOR HVAC PIPING PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SECTION INCLUDES A. Pipe Sleeves. B. Escutcheons. C. Floor Plates. 1.2 REFERENCES A. ASTM A53 -Pipe, Steel, Black and Hot-Dipped, Zinc Coated Welded and Seamless. B. ASTM C1107 -11 Standard Specification for Packaged Dry, Hydraulic-Cement Grout (Nonshrink). C. ASTM D1785 -Poly(Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic Pipe, Schedules 40, 80, and 120. 1.3 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. Provide sleeves for piping penetrations of building construction such as interior partitions, interior and exterior walls, floors, and roofs. B. Provide watertight pipe sleeves for piping penetrations of basement and foundation walls below grade, on-grade floor slabs, floors in potentially wet locations, roof slabs, and at other locations as specified or indicated on the Drawings. C. Provide escutcheons and floor plates at piping penetrations of building construction. D. Coordinate 1.4 SUBMITTALS A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Submittal Procedures.” B. Product Data: For each type of product indicated. C. Manufacturer's Installation Instructions: Indicate special procedures, and external controls. 1.5 PROJECT RECORD DOCUMENTS A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Project Record Documents.” B. Record actual locations of watertight sleeve-seal fittings. SLEEVES AND ESCUTCHEONS FOR HVAC PIPING 230517 -1 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  1.6 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE DATA A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Operation and Maintenance Data.” 1.7 QUALIFICATIONS A. Manufacturer: Company specializing in manufacturing the products specified in this Section with minimum 3 years’ experience. 1.8 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Deliver, store, protect and handle products to site under provisions of Division 01. B. Protect materials from exposure by leaving factory coverings and packaging in place until installation. 1.9 WARRANTY A. Provide warranty under provisions of Division 01 Section “Closeout Procedures.” PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 PIPE SLEEVES A. Cast-Iron Wall Pipes: Cast or fabricated of cast or ductile iron and equivalent to ductile-iron pressure pipe, with plain ends and integral waterstop unless otherwise indicated. B. Galvanized-Steel Wall Pipes: ASTM A53, Schedule 40, with plain ends and welded steel collar; zinc coated. C. Galvanized-Steel-Pipe Sleeves: ASTM A53, Type E, Grade B, Schedule 40, zinc coated, with plain ends. D. Galvanized-Steel-Sheet Sleeves: 0.0239-inch (0.6-mm) minimum thickness; round tube closed with welded longitudinal joint. E. Molded-Polyethylene (PE) or molded-polypropylene (PP) Sleeves: Removable, tapered-cup-shaped, and smooth outer surface with nailing flange for attaching to wooden forms. 2.2 ESCUTCHEONS A. Material: Brass at floors and in potentially damp or wet locations. Brass or steel in other locations. B. Finish: Except as indicated below, polished chrome plated in exposed locations, prime painted steel or rough brass in mechanical rooms and similar spaces. C. One-Piece, Cast-Brass Type: With finish and setscrew fastener. SLEEVES AND ESCUTCHEONS FOR HVAC PIPING 230517 -2 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  D. One-Piece, Deep-Pattern Type: Deep-drawn, box-shaped brass with chrome-plated finish and spring-clip fasteners. E. One-Piece, Stamped-Steel Type: With chrome-plated finish and spring-clip fasteners. F. Split-Casting Brass Type: With concealed hinge and setscrew. G. Split-Plate, Stamped-Steel Type: With chrome-plated finish, hinge, and spring-clip fasteners. 2.3 FLOOR PLATES A. Material: Brass in exposed locations. Brass or cast iron in other locations including mechanical equipment spaces. B. Finish: Except as indicated below, polished chrome plated in exposed locations, prime painted steel or rough brass in mechanical rooms and similar spaces. C. One-Piece Floor Plates: Cast-iron flange. D. Split-Casting Floor Plates: Cast brass with concealed hinge. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 INSTALLATION A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Provide sleeves for piping passing through penetrations in floors, partitions, roofs, and walls. C. Install sleeves in concrete floors, concrete roof slabs, and concrete walls as the slabs and walls are constructed. D. Size sleeves to allow firestopping. E. Size holes and sleeves to allow the required clear annular space for insulation, and a minimum of 1/4 in. (6.4 mm) clear outside the pipe and insulation for movement due to and expansion and contraction. F. Watertight Pipe Sleeves: Provide watertight pipe sleeve systems in penetrations of exterior concrete walls and slabs-on-grade at service piping entries into building, and at other locations as specified or indicated on the Drawings. 1. Provide smooth, core-drilled hole in concrete construction, or a metal or plastic pipe sleeve. 2. For core-drilled holes, additional sleeves aren’t required. Grind and grout surfaces of holes smooth as required for a tight seal. SLEEVES AND ESCUTCHEONS FOR HVAC PIPING 230517 -3 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  3. Size holes and sleeves to allow the required clear annular space for the sealing system. 4. Select type, size, and number of sealing link elements required for piping material and size and for sleeve ID or hole size. 5. Position piping in center of sleeve. Center piping in penetration, assemble watertight seal system components, and install in annular space between piping and sleeve. Tighten bolts against pressure plates that cause sealing elements to expand and make a watertight seal. G. Cut sleeves flush with both surfaces, except at floors. H. Extend sleeves through floors as follows: In locations not otherwise indicated, 2 inch (50 mm) above finished floor level. In normally-dry locations such as finished office spaces under fintube and baseboard radiation, 1 inch (25 mm) above finished floor level. Finished floor level includes the thickness of floor finish materials such as carpet and tile. Caulk sleeves full depth and provide floor plate. I. Fasten sleeves permanently in place. J. Using grout, seal the space outside of sleeves in concrete slabs and walls which do not have watertight sleeve system. K. Provide escutcheons for piping penetrations of walls, ceilings, and finished floors. L. Provide floor plates for piping penetrations of equipment-room floors. M. Escutcheons and floor plates on bare piping shall be one-piece type where possible. Escutcheons and floor plates on insulated piping and on existing piping shall be split, hinged type. N. Size escutcheons and floor plates with ID to closely fit around pipe, tube, and insulation of piping and with OD that completely covers opening. END OF SECTION 230517 SLEEVES AND ESCUTCHEONS FOR HVAC PIPING 230517 -4 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  SECTION 230519 METERS AND GAUGES FOR HVAC PIPING PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SECTION INCLUDES A. Pressure gauges and Pressure gauge taps. B. Static pressure gauges. C. Filter gauges. D. Test Plugs. E. Thermometers and thermometer wells. F. Thermowell heat transfer paste. 1.2 RELATED SECTIONS A. Division 23 Section “Hydronic Piping.” B. Division 23 Section “Instrumentation and Controls for Mechanical Systems.” 1.3 REFERENCES A. ASME B40.1 -Gauges -Pressure Indicating Dial Type -Elastic Element. B. ASME MFC-3M -Measurement of Fluid Flow in Pipes Using Orifice, Nozzle and Venturi. C. ASTM D217 -Standard Test Methods for Cone Penetration of Lubricating Grease. D. ASTM D566 -Standard Test Method for Dropping Point of Lubricating Grease. E. ASTM E1 -Standard Specification for ASTM Thermometers. F. ASTM E77 -Standard Test Method for Inspection and Verification of Thermometers. G. AWWA C706 -Direct-Reading Remote-Registration Systems for Cold-Water Meters. H. AWWA C710 -Cold-Water Meters -Displacement Type, Plastic Main Case. I. AWWA M6 -Water Meters -Selection, Installation, Testing, and Maintenance. J. HCF_SPEC-13 -HART Communication Protocol Specification. K. MIL-HDBK-217F – Military Handbook – Reliability Prediction of Electronic Equipment. METERS AND GAUGES FOR HVAC PIPING 230519 -1 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  L. UL 393 -Indicating Pressure Gauges for Fire-Protection Service. M. UL 404 -Gauges, Indicating Pressure, for Compressed Gas Service. 1.4 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Manufacturer's Qualifications: Company specializing in manufacturing the Products specified in this Section with minimum 3 years’ experience. 1.5 SUBMITTALS A. Division 01 Section “Submittal Procedures”: Procedures for submittals. B. Product Data: Provide manufacturers data and list which indicates use, operating range, total range, accuracy, and location for manufactured components. 1.6 PROJECT RECORD DOCUMENTS A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Closeout Procedures.” B. Project Record Documents: Record actual locations of components and instrumentation. 1.7 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE DATA A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Operation and Maintenance Data.” B. Include instructions for calibrating instruments. 1.8 ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS A. Division 01 Section “Product Requirements”: Environmental conditions affecting products on site. B. Do not install instruments when areas are under construction, except for required rough-in, taps, supports and test plugs. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 PRESSURE GAUGES A. Manufacturers: 1. Weiss. 2. Trerice. 3. Marshalltown. 4. Amtek. METERS AND GAUGES FOR HVAC PIPING 230519 -2 5. Dwyer. B. Gauges, Hot Water Heating Systems: Weiss Series 4PG-1 industrial pressure gauge, dry non-filled type, with phosphor bronze bourdon tube, silver brazed connecting joints, brass socket, bushed stainless rotary movement, 1/4-inch NPT connection, white aluminum dial with black markings, black aluminum pointer with front slotted adjustment. 1. Case: Cast aluminum or stainless steel. 2. Lens: Push-in Lexan polycarbonate, or clear glass or acrylic with stainless steel ring, per manufacturer’s standard. 3. Bourdon Tube: Phosphor bronze. 4. Dial Size: 4 to 4-1/2 inch (101 to 114 mm). 5. Connection: Lower or lower back, 1/4 inch or 1/2 inch NPT, as selected by Contractor. 6. Accuracy: 1 percent of full scale range, per ANSI-ASME B40.1 Grade 1A. 7. Scale: Psi. 8. Range: 0-60 psig typical, select for application. C. Verify suitability of range for each application. Best selection is for typical reading to be close to mid-scale. 2.2 PRESSURE GAUGE TAPPINGS A. Ball Valve: Provide under Division 23 Section “Hydronic Piping.” B. Pulsation Damper: 1. Manufacturers: a. Weiss. b. Trerice. c. Marshalltown. d. Amtek. e. Dwyer. 2. Pressure snubber, brass with 1/4 inch (6 mm) NPT connections. METERS AND GAUGES FOR HVAC PIPING 230519 -3 2.3 STATIC PRESSURE GAUGES A. Dial Gauges: 1. Manufacturers: a. Dwyer. b. Trerice. c. Marshalltown. d. Amtek. 2. 3-1/2 inch (89 mm) diameter dial in metal case, diaphragm actuated, black figures on white background, front recalibration adjustment, 2 percent of full scale accuracy. B. Inclined Manometer: 1. Manufacturers: a. Dwyer. b. Trerice. c. Marshalltown. d. Amtek. 2. Plastic with red liquid on white background with black figures, front recalibration adjustment, 3 percent of full-scale accuracy. C. Accessories: Static pressure tips with compression fittings for bulkhead mounting, 1/4 inch (6 mm) diameter tubing. 2.4 TEMPERATURE TRANSMITTER -DIGITAL SELF-INDICATING A. Manufacturers: 1. Weiss. 2. Or approved equal. B. Thermometer: Weiss Vari-angle Self-indicating Temperature Transmitter, high-impact black ABS plastic case, adjustable angle and swivel head. Light-powered, no batteries. Stem assembly shall be in full conformance with Fed. Spec GG-T-321D for industrial glass thermometers, or ASTM B40.3-1990 for bimetallic dial thermometers. Recalibration via potentiometer adjustment. 1. Sensor type: Glass passivated thermistor. METERS AND GAUGES FOR HVAC PIPING 230519 -4 Bid Pack No2 2. Size: 1/2 inch (12.5 mm) high LCD digits. 3. Bulb: Provide extended bulb for socket extension in insulated pipe. 4. Accuracy: 1 percent of reading or 1 degree, whichever is greater. 5. Calibration: Switchable for degrees F and degrees C. 6. Scale Range: -50 to 300° F (-45 to 150° C). 7. Graduations: 1/10 degree between -19.9 to 199.9° F (-28 to 93° C). 8. Ambient Operating Range: -30 to 140° F (-35 to 60° C). 9. Ambient Temperature Error: Zero. 10. Allowable Humidity: 0 to 100 percent RH. 11. Update: 10 seconds. 12. Light Requirement: 10 Lux (1 foot-candle). 13. Air Duct Flange: Provide for duct applications. C. Transmitter: 1. Sensor Type: Platinum 100 ohm RTD. 2. Output: 4 to 20 mA. 3. Power Requirement: 8.5 to 35 VDC. 4. Accuracy: 0.5 percent of span. 5. Range: -58 to 302° F (-50 to 150 degrees C). 6. Graduations: 1/10 degree between -19.9 to 199.9° F (-28 to 93° C). 7. Ambient Operating Range: -15 to 185° F (-25 to 85° C). 8. Ambient Temperature Error: 0.015 percent of span. D. Provide conduit connector. E. Provide outdoor waterproof cover for wet locations. METERS AND GAUGES FOR HVAC PIPING 230519 -5 2.5 TEST PLUGS A. Test Plug: 1. Manufacturers: a. Peterson Equipment Co., Inc., “Pete’s Plugs”. b. Weiss. c. Flow Design, Inc. d. Trerice. 2. 1/2 inch (13 mm) NPT brass fitting and cap for receiving 1/8 inch (3 mm) outside diameter pressure or temperature probe with self-closing valves as follows: a. Nordel (EPDM) core for water and hydronic heating and cooling service, temperatures range 30 to 275° F (-1 to 176°C). b. Neoprene core for natural gas or LP gas service, temperature range -40 to 150° F (-40 to 65° C). c. Verify core suitability for other fluids and temperatures. 3. Working Pressure: 500 psig 4. Cap Retaining Strap: Color coded to indicate core material. 5. Construction with either dual self-closing valves (Pete’s Plug standard design) or single valve are allowed. B. Pressure and Temperature Test Kit: Furnish 1 to the Owner. 1. Carrying case with inside foam padding. 2. Pressure gauge, liquid filled with 1/4 inch (6 mm) NPT connection, range 0 to 100 psig (0 to 700 kPa), with gauge adapter attached. 3. Additional gauge adapter with 1/8 inch (3 mm) diameter probe and protecting shield. 4. Bimetal thermometer, range 25 to 125° F (-5 to 50° C), 5 inch (127 mm) stem, 1-3/4 inch (44 mm) dial, external calibration. 5. Bimetal thermometer, range 0 to 220° F (-17 to 104° C), 5 inch (127 mm) stem, 1-3/4 inch (44 mm) dial, external calibration. 6. If extended “XL” plugs are used, provide the XL test kit which is suitable for any length of plug. METERS AND GAUGES FOR HVAC PIPING 230519 -6 2.6 THERMOMETERS -DIAL A. Manufacturers: 1. Weiss. 2. Trerice. 3. Amtek. 4. Ernst. B. Thermometer: Weiss Model 45VA, ASTM E1, stainless steel or cast aluminum case, adjustable angle with front recalibration, vapor actuated, black scale on white-finished metal background, black pointer, sealed lens, brass stem. 1. Size: 4 to 4-1/2 inch (101 to 114 mm) dial. 2. Lens: Snap-in Lexan polycarbonate with o-ring, or clear glass with rubber ring. 3. Bulb: Copper. Provide extended bulb for socket extension in insulated pipe. 4. Extended Bulb: Where required, provide extended capillary tube with braided copper protection. 5. Connection: Separable socket. 6. Accuracy: 1 scale division throughout range. 7. Calibration: Both degrees F and degrees C. 8. Scale Range: 0 to100° F (-20 to 40° C) for plumbing cold water and chilled water systems; 30 to 240° F (0 to 115°C) for plumbing hot water, hot water heating, and supply air systems. 9. Graduations: 2 degrees F. 10. Air Duct Flange: Provide for duct applications. C. Provide dial type except where digital type is preferable. 2.7 THERMOMETERS -DIGITAL A. Manufacturers: 1. Weiss. 2. Or approved equal. B. Thermometer: Weiss Vari-angle Digital Thermometer, high-impact black ABS plastic case, adjustable angle and swivel head. Light-powered, no batteries. Stem METERS AND GAUGES FOR HVAC PIPING 230519 -7 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  assembly shall be in full conformance with Fed. Spec GG-T-321D for industrial glass thermometers, or ASTM B40.3-1990 for bimetallic dial thermometers. Recalibration via potentiometer adjustment. 1. Sensor type: Glass passivated thermistor. 2. Size: 1/2 inch (12.5 mm) high LCD digits. 3. Bulb: Provide extended bulb for socket extension in insulated pipe. 4. Accuracy: 1 percent of reading or 1 degree, whichever is greater. 5. Calibration: Switchable for degrees F and degrees C. 6. Scale Range: -50 to 300° F (-45 to 150° C). 7. Graduations: 1/10 degree between -19.9 to 199.9° F (-28 to 93° C). 8. Ambient Operating Range: -30 to 140° F (-35 to 60° C). 9. Ambient Temperature Error: Zero. 10. Allowable Humidity: 0 to 100 percent RH. 11. Update: 10 seconds. 12. Light Requirement: 10 Lux (1 foot-candle). 13. Air Duct Flange: Provide for duct applications. C. Provide outdoor waterproof cover for wet locations. D. May be used as an alternative to dial thermometers. 2.8 THERMOMETERS -STEM TYPE A. Not allowed. 2.9 THERMOMETER SUPPORTS A. Socket (Thermometer Well) for Piping: Brass separable sockets for thermometer stems, with extensions for insulated piping. Provide with Honeywell viscous heat transfer paste. B. Flange for Duct: 3 inch (76 mm) outside diameter reversible flange, designed to fasten to sheet metal air ducts, with brass perforated stem. METERS AND GAUGES FOR HVAC PIPING 230519 -8 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  2.10 THERMOWELL HEAT TRANSFER PASTE A. Manufacturers: 1. MG Chemicals. 2. Honeywell. 3. Trerice. B. Description: 1. Formulation: Silicone or synthetic base, containing metal oxides. 2. Thermal Conductivity: At least 4.5 Btu-in./(hr-ft2-ºF) (0.65 W/(m-K). 3. Temperature Range: To 392° F (200° C). 4. Flash Point: 500° F (260° C). 5. Dropping Point: ASTM D566, greater than 500 degrees F (260 degrees C). 6. Specific Gravity: 2.3 minimum at 77° F (25° C). 7. Consistency: ASTM D217, 310 to 320. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 INSTALLATION A. Use ball valves for water service; use needle valves for steam service. B. Division 01 -Quality Requirements: Manufacturer's instructions. C. Install 1 pressure gauge per pump, with taps on suction and discharge of pump; pipe to gauge. D. Install gauge taps in piping; refer to Division 23 Section “Hydronic Piping”. E. Install pressure gauges with pulsation dampers. Provide valve to isolate each gauge; see “Pressure Gauge Tappings” in this Section. Extend nipples to allow clearance from insulation. F. Install thermometers in piping systems in sockets in short couplings. Enlarge pipes smaller than 2-1/2 inches (64 mm) for installation of thermometer sockets. Ensure sockets allow clearance from insulation. G. Install thermometers in air duct systems on flanges. H. Fill thermometer sockets with heat transfer paste. METERS AND GAUGES FOR HVAC PIPING 230519 -9 I. Install thermometer sockets adjacent to controls systems thermostat, transmitter, or sensor sockets. J. Locate duct mounted thermometers minimum 10 feet (3 m) downstream of mixing dampers, coils, or other devices causing air turbulence. K. Coil and conceal excess capillary on remote element instruments. L. Install static pressure gauges to measure across filters and filter banks (inlet to outlet). On multiple banks, provide manifold and single gauge. M. Provide instruments with scale ranges selected according to service with largest appropriate scale. N. Install gauges and thermometers in locations where they are easily read from normal operating level. Install vertical to 45 degrees off vertical. O. Adjust gauges and thermometers to final angle, clean windows and lenses, and calibrate to zero. P. Locate test plugs where indicated. Q. Provide pressure gauge at high point of system for setting of cold water make-up pressure reducing valve. R. Provide pressure gauge at connection to bladder type expansion tank for setting of air side pre-charge pressure. END OF SECTION 230519 METERS AND GAUGES FOR HVAC PIPING 230519 -10 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  SECTION 230529 HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SECTION INCLUDES A. Pipe and equipment hangers and supports. B. Sleeves and seals. C. Flashing and sealing equipment and pipe stacks. 1.2 SUBMITTALS A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Submittal Procedures”. B. Shop Drawings: Indicate system layout with location and detail of trapeze hangers. C. Product Data: Provide manufacturers catalog data including load capacity. D. Design Data: Indicate load carrying capacity of trapeze, multiple pipe, and riser support hangers. E. Manufacturer's Installation Instructions: Indicate special procedures and assembly of components. 1.3 QUALIFICATIONS A. Manufacturer: Company specializing in manufacturing the products specified in this Section with minimum 3 years’ experience. 1.4 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS A. Conform to applicable Codes for support of piping. B. Supports for Electrical: In conformance with NFPA 70 and Division 26 of the Specifications. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 HANGERS, SUPPORTS, & PIPE CLAMPS A. Approved Manufacturers (first manufacturer is basis of design): 1. Strut Hangers: a. Unistrut (division of Tyco). HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 230529 -1 Bid Pack No2 b. Anvil International. c. Cooper B-Line. d. Hydra-Zorb Company. e. Thomas & Betts -Superstrut line. f. Tolco (division of Cooper B-Line). 2. Adjustable Swivel Band Hangers: a. Carpenter & Paterson. b. Anvil International. c. Cooper B-Line. d. Tolco (division of Cooper B-Line). 3. Clevis Hangers: a. Cooper B-Line. b. Anvil International. c. Carpenter & Paterson. d. Tolco (division of Cooper B-Line). 4. J-Hangers: a. Cooper B-Line. b. Carpenter & Paterson. c. Thomas & Betts -Superstrut line. d. Tolco (division of Cooper B-Line). e. Unistrut (division of Tyco). 5. Cushion Clamps: a. Hydra-Zorb Company. b. Cooper B-Line. c. Thomas & Betts -Superstrut line. d. Tolco (division of Cooper B-Line). HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 230529 -2 e. Unistrut (division of Tyco). 6. Insulated Pipe Couplings: a. Cooper B-Line -Armafix line. b. Klo-Shure Corporation. 7. No substitutions. B. Horizontal Piping Supports: Provide struts for trapeze hangers for single or multiple pipes. Where individual piping runs are hung with individual hangers, adjustable swivel band hangers, clevis hangers, or j-hangers may be used. C. Strut hangers shall be standard 1-5/8 inches x1-5/8 inches (41x41 mm) size. D. Hangers, clamps, and supports located outdoors or otherwise exposed to weather, or in wet areas, shall be hot-dipped galvanized steel or 300-series stainless steel. Struts may be extruded aluminum. Threaded rods, nuts, and washers may have standard galvanizing if hot-dipped galvanized is not available. 1. Hot-dipped galvanized steel shall have a nominal zinc coating of 2.6 mil (0.066 mm) thickness and 1.5 oz./sq.ft (458 g/m2) coating weight. 2. In lieu of galvanizing, strut systems and their accessories may have Unistrut Perma-Green III electrodeposited thermoset acrylic coating, or be epoxy-coated equal to B-Line’s Dura-Green or Dura-Copper coatings. 3. Lesser coatings for struts and clamps, such as pre-galvanizing (0.75 mil (0.019 mm) thickness), electroplated zinc (0.2 to 0.5 mil (0.005 to 0.013 mm) thickness), and yellow zinc dichromate coating, are not acceptable in these locations. E. Pipe hanger rods and nuts shall be plated to match the hangers. Nuts shall be self-locking type, or provide double nuts tightened to lock together. Rods shall be threaded one end, or continuous threaded. Provide washers at each nut. F. Copper-plated hangers are plated for identification only. Traditional thin copper plating on steel substrate does not provide adequate protection from galvanic corrosion due to contact between dissimilar metals. 1. Where copper-plated supports are specified for use with copper piping, either copper plating or a copper-colored finish such as Cooper B-Line’s Dura-Copper epoxy coating is acceptable. This is for identification, and does not protect dissimilar metals. 2. Where copper piping is used with steel hangers and supports, provide protection from galvanic corrosion such as thick plastic or vinyl factory coating, or plastic-lined cushion clamps. G. For Insulated Lines Clamped to Strut: Insulated pipe coupling insert with the same HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 230529 -3 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  thickness as the insulation. Protects insulation from crushing and provides continuous insulation and vapor barrier thru the hanger or clamp. Klo-Shure product provides plastic pipe support and rigid outer band, for field insulation into the coupling. Armafix product provides insulation with rigid outer band, for field insulation glued to the ends of the insert. 2.2 PIPE SUPPORTS A. Hydronic Piping: 1. Conform to ASME B31.9, ASTM F708, MSS SP58, MSS SP69 and MSS SP89. 2. Hangers for Pipe Sizes 1/2 to 1-1/2 inch (13 to 38 mm): Malleable iron, adjustable swivel, split ring. 3. Hangers for Cold Pipe Sizes 2 inches (50 mm) and Over: Carbon steel, adjustable, clevis. 4. Hangers for Hot Pipe Sizes 2 to 4 inches (50 to 100 mm): Carbon steel, adjustable, clevis. 5. Hangers for Hot Pipe Sizes 5 inches (125 mm) and Over: Adjustable steel yoke, cast iron roll, double hanger. 6. Multiple or Trapeze Hangers: Steel channels with welded spacers and hanger rods. 7. Multiple or Trapeze Hangers for Hot Pipe Sizes 6 inches (150 mm) and Over: Steel channels with welded spacers and hanger rods, cast iron roll. 8. Wall Support for Pipe Sizes to 3 inches (76 mm): Cast iron hook. 9. Wall Support for Cold Pipe Sizes 4 inches (100 mm) and Over: Welded steel bracket and wrought steel clamp. 10. Wall Support for Hot Pipe Sizes 4 inches (100 mm) and Over: Welded steel bracket and wrought steel clamp with adjustable steel yoke and cast iron roll. 11. Vertical Support: Steel riser clamp. 12. Floor Support for Cold Pipe: Cast iron adjustable pipe saddle, lock nut, nipple, floor flange, and concrete pier or steel support. 13. Floor Support for Hot Pipe Sizes to 4 inches (100 mm): Cast iron adjustable pipe saddle, lock nut, nipple, floor flange, and concrete pier or steel support. 14. Floor Support for Hot Pipe Sizes 5 inches (125 mm) and Over: Adjustable cast iron roll and stand, steel screws, and concrete pier or steel support. 15. Copper Pipe Support: Carbon steel ring, adjustable, copper plated. HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 230529 -4 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  2.3 INSERTS A. Manufacturers: 1. Cooper B-Line. 2. Grinnell. B. Inserts: Malleable iron case of steel shell and expander plug for threaded connection with lateral adjustment, top slot for reinforcing rods, lugs for attaching to forms; size inserts to suit threaded hanger rods. 2.4 FLASHING A. Metal Flashing: 26 ga (0.5 mm) thick galvanized steel. B. Metal Counterflashing: 22 ga (0.8 mm) thick galvanized steel. C. Lead Flashing: 1. Waterproofing: 5 lb/sq ft (24.5 kg/sq m) sheet lead 2. Soundproofing: 1 lb/sq ft (5 kg/sq m) sheet lead. D. Flexible Flashing: 47 mil (1.2 mm) thick sheet butyl; compatible with roofing. E. Caps: Steel, 22 ga (0.8 mm) minimum; 16 ga (1.5 mm) at fire resistant elements. 2.5 SLEEVES A. Sleeves for Pipes Through Non-fire Rated Floors: 18 ga (1.2 mm) thick galvanized steel. B. Sleeves for Pipes Through Non-fire Rated Beams, Walls, Footings, and Potentially Wet Floors: Steel pipe or 18 ga (1.2 mm) thick galvanized steel. C. Sleeves for Pipes Through Fire Rated and Fire Resistive Floors and Walls, and Fire Proofing: Prefabricated fire rated sleeves including seals, UL listed. D. Sleeves for Round Ductwork: Galvanized steel. E. Sleeves for Rectangular Ductwork: Galvanized steel. F. Stuffing or Firestopping Insulation: Glass fiber type, non-combustible. G. Sealant: Acrylic. 2.6 NON-PENETRATING ROOF-MOUNTED PIPE SUPPORT SYSTEM A. Roof Support Blocks: Cooper B-Line Inc. -Dura-Blok product line. HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 230529 -5 B. Curb Base: 1. 100% recycled rubber and polyurethane prepolymer, UV resistant. Support capacity of 500 pounds per linear foot (744 kg/m) of support. Note: Consult roofing manufacturer; the weakest point may be the insulation board beneath the roof membrane; provide additional roofing protection sheets as required. 2. Each base shall have a reflective yellow stripe. 3. Base Dimensions: 6 inches (152 mm) wide, at least 4 inches 102 mm) tall, with length as selected by the manufacturer for the load and roof conditions. 4. Material Properties: Property Value Standard a. Density 0.52 oz/cu in. (0.90 g/cm3) ASTM C642 b. Durometer Hardness 67.2A +/-1 ASTM D2240 c. Tensile Strength 231 psi (1.59 MPa) ASTM D412 d. Compression Deformation 5% at 70psi (0.48 MPa) and ASTM D395 72° F (22° C) e. Brittleness at Low Temp -50° F (-45° C) ASTM D746 f. Freeze and thaw when No loss after 50 cycles ASTM C672 exposed to deicing chemicals g. Coefficient of Thermal 8 x 10 -6 in/in/° F (min) ASTM C531 Expansion (minimum) (14 x 10 -6 cm/cm/° C) h. Weathering, 70 hours at 120° F (49° C) ASTM D573 1) Hardness retained 100 percent (+/-5 percent) 2) Compressive strength 100 percent (+/-5 percent) 3) Tensile strength 100 percent (+/-5 percent) 4) Elongation retained 100 percent (+/-5 percent) 5. Note: Acceptable substitutes by Miro Industries and Unistrut have bases of UV-resistant polycarbonate plastic, and accessories of hot-dipped galvanized steel, or stainless steel. The properties of these are different from the rubber block type. In particular, the weight capacity per foot of the polycarbonate bases is HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 230529 -6 less. Consult the factory. 6. Note: Materials other than rubber or polycarbonate, such as polyethylene plastic, are not allowed. C. Bases shall be rubber block supports, or block supports with channels. Rubber block supports furnished without channels shall be suitable for factory-or field-fastening accessories directly into rubber material with weather-resistant type 12 hex-head lag screws. Supports furnished with channels shall have base rubber blocks spaced at least 1 inch (25 mm) apart for water drainage. D. Steel Frame: Steel strut, hot-dip galvanized per ASTM A653, 14 gauge (1.9 mm) strut for DB and DBR and DB_DS Series, 12 gauge (2.6 mm) strut for DB6 and DB10 Series. Struts may be epoxy-coated equal to B-Line’s Dura-Green or Dura-Copper coatings in lieu of galvanizing. E. Attaching Hardware: Zinc-plated threaded rod, nuts and attaching hardware per ASTM B633. F. Multi-Pipe/Equipment Support: C-Port single-base C-Series models with 13/16 inch strut, or dual-base CB-Series “Bridge Type” with 1-5/8 inch strut. Strut attached to base for fastening of accessories. Select length to suit number of pipes or equipment fastened, allowing 1 inch of space at either end of support. G. Extendible Height Support: DBE (channel) or DBR (roller) Series, with rod height to suit application. Two 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) all-thread rods per 9.6 inch (244 mm) base (select base length as required), with nuts and washers. DBR Series is designed to support pipes up to 3-1/2-inch (90 mm) nominal size. Standard load rating is 200 pounds (0.89 kN) per base due to point loading at support rods; CLDP10 load distribution plates of 11-gauge (3.0 mm) galvanized steel may be used for increased loading. H. Vertical-Channel Supports: For support of piping, ducts, equipment, cable trays, walkway systems, and other applications. Base blocks parallel to axis of supported items and direction of expansion, top strut channel perpendicular to axis of items, and vertical strut channels and hardware. I. Roller Support: Provide zinc-plated steel rollers where longitudinal movement is expected. J. Sloped Roof Support: Provide adjustable hinge fittings to accommodate slope. K. Pipe/conduit clamps shall be channel style, B-Line B2000 or B2400 series or approved equal, made of galvanized steel (or steel with coating to provide equivalent protection for outdoor use). For refrigeration pipes, provide B-Line Vibra-Cushion or Vibra-Clamp internally cushioned clamps. Provide plastic-coated or epoxy-coated pipe support where metal is in contact with copper pipe. L. Provide extendible height supports when spacing above roof, or sloping of pipe to drain, or both, are required. HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 230529 -7 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  M. Where piping might be in contact with rubber or plastic materials such as rollers, verify suitability of the material for the piping temperature. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 INSTALLATION A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. 3.2 INSERTS A. Provide inserts for placement in concrete formwork. B. Provide inserts for suspending hangers from reinforced concrete slabs and sides of reinforced concrete beams. C. Provide hooked rod to concrete reinforcement section for inserts carrying pipe over 4 inches (100 mm). D. Where concrete slabs form finished ceiling, locate inserts flush with slab surface. E. Where inserts are omitted, drill through concrete slab from below and provide through-bolt with recessed square steel plate and nut recessed into and grouted flush with slab. 3.3 PIPE HANGERS AND SUPPORTS A. Support horizontal piping as scheduled. B. Install hangers to provide minimum 1/2 inch (13 mm) space between finished covering and adjacent work. C. Place hangers within 12 inches (300 mm) of each horizontal elbow. D. Use hangers with 1-1/2 inch (38 mm) minimum vertical adjustment. E. Support horizontal cast iron pipe adjacent to each hub, with 5 feet (1.5 m) maximum spacing between hangers. F. Support vertical piping at every floor. Support vertical cast iron pipe at each floor at hub. G. Where several pipes can be installed in parallel and at same elevation, provide multiple or trapeze hangers. H. Support riser piping independently of connected horizontal piping. I. Provide copper plated hangers and supports for copper piping. J. Design hangers for pipe movement without disengagement of supported pipe. HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 230529 -8 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  K. Prime coat exposed steel hangers and supports. Refer to Division 09 Section “Painting”. Hangers and supports located in crawl spaces, pipe shafts, and suspended ceiling spaces are not considered exposed. L. Do not support pipes from other pipes or equipment. M. Size pipe hangers to accommodate continuous piping insulation. 3.4 EQUIPMENT BASES AND SUPPORTS A. Provide housekeeping pads of concrete, minimum 4 inches (100 mm) thick and extending 6 inches (150 mm) beyond supported equipment, with 1 inch (25 mm) chamfered edges. Provide dowels to fasten pad to structural floor. Refer to Division 03. Unless otherwise shown or specified, floor-mounted major equipment shall be set on housekeeping pads and anchored to housekeeping pads. This shall include but not be limited to, air handling units, utility set fans, compressors, base mounted pumps, boilers, converters, heat exchangers, storage tanks and expansion tanks. B. Provide templates, anchor bolts, and accessories for mounting and anchoring equipment. C. Construct supports of steel members. Brace and fasten with flanges bolted to structure. D. Provide rigid anchors for pipes after vibration isolation components are installed. E. Do not support equipment from pipes or from other equipment. 3.5 FLASHING A. Provide flexible flashing and metal counterflashing where piping and ductwork penetrate weatherproofed or waterproofed walls, floors, and roofs. B. Flash pipes projecting 3 inches (75 mm) minimum above finished roof surface with lead, 8 inches (200 mm) minimum clear on sides with 24 x 24 inches (600 x 600 mm) sheet size. For pipes through outside walls, turn flanges back into wall and caulk, counterflash with metal, and seal. C. Provide acoustical lead flashing around ducts and pipes penetrating equipment rooms, installed in accordance with manufacturer's instructions for sound control. D. Provide curbs for mechanical roof installations 14 inches (350 mm) minimum high above roofing surface. Flash and counterflash with sheet metal; seal watertight. Attach counterflashing mechanical equipment and lap base flashing on roof curbs. Flatten and solder joints. E. Adjust storm collars tight to pipe with bolts; caulk around top edge. Use storm collars above roof jacks. Screw vertical flange section to face of curb. HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 230529 -9 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  3.6 SLEEVES A. Set sleeves in position in formwork. Provide reinforcing around sleeves. B. Size sleeves large enough to allow for movement due to expansion and contraction. Provide for continuous insulation wrapping. C. Extend sleeves through floors 1 inch (25 mm) above finished floor level. Caulk sleeves. D. Where piping or ductwork penetrates floor, ceiling, or wall, close off space between pipe or duct and adjacent work with fire stopping insulation and caulk air tight. Provide close fitting metal collar or escutcheon covers at both sides of penetration. E. Install chrome plated steel escutcheons at finished surfaces. 3.7 SUPPORTS ABOVE ROOF A. Where possible, support piping and equipment from building structural steel and grillage. 3.8 SUPPORTING OTHER TRADES A. Supports furnished under Division 23 of the Specifications may also be used to support piping furnished under Division 22 “Plumbing” and conduits furnished under Division 26 “Electrical” if this Subcontractor is willing to allow this. Supports shared with other trades shall be designed to accommodate the weight, expansion/contraction, vibration, and other requirements of the other trades’ items without detriment to the function, accessibility, and serviceability of the HVAC items or those of the other trades. Provide flexible sections of piping and conduit as required to allow each trade’s items to expand and contract along with the other trades, and to absorb vibration caused by the other trades. B. Electrical lighting fixtures and equipment, and architectural items such as ceilings, may not be supported from supports furnished under this Section. C. Prevent contact between components of other trades, such as architectural suspended ceiling support wires, and HVAC supports which may transmit vibration to the occupied space. HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 230529 -10 3.9 SCHEDULES PIPE SIZE  HANGER ROD MAX. HANGER SPACING  DIAMETER  Inches  (mm)  Feet  (m)  Inches  (mm)  Steel and Copper Piping  1/2 to 1-1/4  12 to 32  6.5  2  3/8  9  1-1/2 to 2  38 to 50  10  3  3/8  9  2-1/2 to 3  62 to 75  10  3  1/2  13  4 to 6  100 to 150  10  3  5/8  15  8 to 12  200 to 300  14  4.25  7/8  22  14 and Over  350 and Over  20  6  1  25  Polypropylene Piping  1/2 to 2-1/2  12 to 64  4  1.2  3/8  9  3 and over  75 and over  6  1.8  3/8  9  PVC (All Sizes)  6  1.8  3/8  9  C.I. Bell and Spigot (or No-Hub) and at Joints  5  1.5  5/8  15  END OF SECTION 230529 HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 230529 -11 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  SECTION 230553 IDENTIFICATION FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SECTION INCLUDES A. Nameplates. B. Tags. C. Labels. D. Pipe Markers. E. Lockout Devices. 1.2 RELATED SECTIONS A. Division 09 Section “Painting”: Identification painting. 1.3 REFERENCES A. ASME A13.1 -Scheme for the Identification of Piping Systems (2007 edition or newer). B. NFPA 90A -Standard for the Installation of Air-Conditioning and Ventilating Systems. C. NFPA 99 -Standard for Health Care Facilities. 1.4 SUBMITTALS A. Division 01 Section “Submittal Procedures.” B. Submit list of wording, symbols, letter size, and color coding for mechanical identification. C. Submit valve chart and schedule, including valve tag number, location, function, and valve manufacturer's name and model number. D. Product Data: Provide manufacturers catalog literature for each product required. E. Samples: Submit two tags, 1-1/2 inches (38 mm) in size. F. Samples: Submit two labels, 1.9 x 0.75 inches (48 x 19 mm) in size. 1.5 PROJECT RECORD DOCUMENTS A. Submit under Division 01 Section “Closeout Procedures.” IDENTIFICATION FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 230553 -1 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  B. Record actual locations of tagged valves; include valve tag numbers. 1.6 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE DATA A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Operation and Maintenance Data.” B. Include valve tag chart. 1.7 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS A. Conform to NFPA 99 requirements for labeling and identification of medical gas piping systems and accessories. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 NAMEPLATES A. Manufacturers: 1. Seton Identification Products. 2. E.R. Perry Signs & Engraving. 3. Brimar Industries, Inc., PipeMarker division. 4. Or approved equal. B. Plastic Nameplates: Laminated 3-layer plastic with beveled edges and engraved letters on contrasting background color, 1/16 inch (1.58 mm) thick. Letters shall be black on light backgrounds, or white on dark backgrounds, as applicable. Service temperature range -40 to 175° F (-40 to 79° C); minimum application temperature for adhesive 50° F (10° C). Suitable for average outdoor lifespan of at least 2-3 years. C. Aluminum Nameplates: For higher temperature applications, and for outdoor applications when manufacturer does not recommend their plastic nameplates for use outdoors, provide aluminum nameplates, with integral anodized or painted surface color coating and natural aluminum engraved letters, 1/32-inch (0.78 mm) thick. Service temperature range -40 to 350° F (-40 to 177° C); minimum application temperature for adhesive 50° F (10° C). Suitable for average outdoor lifespan of at least 2-3 years. D. Colors: Select background color as appropriate for the application. Color for general applications shall be white (except that aluminum nameplate standard color shall be black). Color for general warnings shall be red or yellow. Colors for fluid services shall comply with ASME A13.1-2007. Comply with ASME/ANSI standards and other regulations as applicable. E. Provide with factory adhesive and with side holes for fastener attachment as applicable. Mechanical fasteners are required for applications which are outdoors or otherwise exposed to weather or sunlight, or in moist areas such as kitchens and IDENTIFICATION FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 230553 -2 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  locker rooms, or on cooled surfaces subject to condensation, or on surfaces with operating temperatures above 150° F (65°C). Where nameplate is on an irregular surface and cannot make complete contact, provide mechanical fasteners or ties in addition to adhesive. 2.2 TAGS A. Plastic Tags: 1. Manufacturers: a. Seton Identification Products. b. E.R. Perry Signs & Engraving. c. Brimar Industries, Inc., PipeMarker division. d. No substitutions. 2. Laminated three-layer plastic with engraved black letters on light contrasting background color. Tag size minimum 1-1/2 inches (38 mm) diameter. B. Metal Tags: 1. Manufacturers: a. Seton Identification Products. b. Brady Worldwide, Inc. c. Brimar Industries, Inc., PipeMarker division. d. No substitutions. 2. Brass with stamped letters; tag size minimum 1-1/2 inches (38 mm) diameter with smooth edges. C. Information Tags: 1. Manufacturer: Seton Identification Products. 2. Clear plastic with printed “Danger,” “Caution,” or “Warning” and message; size 3.1/4 x 5-5/8 inches (83 x 143 mm) with grommet and self-locking nylon ties. D. Tag Chains and Hooks: Brass or stainless steel compatible with tag material for general applications. Brass where in contact with copper piping or other copper-alloy materials. E. Tag Chart: Typewritten letter size list in anodized aluminum frame with plexiglass cover. IDENTIFICATION FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 230553 -3 2.3 CEILING DOTS WITH LABEL-MAKER LABELS A. Ceiling Dots: 1. Manufacturer: Avery – Division of Avery Dennison Corporation. 2. Description: Self-adhesive 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) diameter color coded label. B. Label-Maker Labels: 1. Label Maker: a. Manufacturer: 1) Brother. 2) Brady. 3) Dymo. b. Label width capacity: Maximum tape width at least 3/4 inch (19 mm). c. Technology: Thermal transfer. 2. Labels: a. Color: 1) Clear with black lettering for white or off-white ceiling grids. 2) White with black lettering for dark-colored or metallic-colored ceiling grids. b. Width: 1) 3/4 inch (18 mm) for standard 15/16 inch (23.8 mm) wide ceiling grids. 2) 1/2 inch (12 mm) for narrow 9/16 inch (14.3 mm) wide ceiling grids. c. Lettering Height: Maximum size available, for ease of viewing from floor. Typical sizes as follows: 1) 36 point (1/2 in. (12 mm)) on 3/4 inch (18 mm) wide labels. 2) 24 point (1/3 in. (8 mm)) on 1/2 inch (12 mm) wide labels. IDENTIFICATION FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 230553 -4 C. Label-maker labels with color-coded backgrounds are not an acceptable substitute for separate dots and labels. D. Color code as follows: 1. HVAC Equipment: Yellow. 2. Fire Dampers/Smoke Dampers: Red. 3. Plumbing Valves: Green. 4. Heating/Cooling Valves: Blue. 2.4 LABELS A. Manufacturer: Seton Identification Products. B. Description: Polyester, size 1.9 x 0.75 inches (48 x 19 mm), adhesive backed with printed identification. 2.5 PIPE MARKERS A. Color and Lettering: Conform to ASME A13.1. B. Plastic Pipe Markers: 1. Manufacturers: a. Seton Identification Products. b. Brady Worldwide, Inc. c. Brimar Industries, Inc., PipeMarker division. d. No substitutions. 2. Factory fabricated, flexible, semi-rigid plastic, preformed to fit around pipe or pipe covering. Larger sizes may have maximum sheet size with spring fastener. 2.6 LOCKOUT DEVICES A. Lockout Hasps: 1. Manufacturers: a. Seton Identification Products. b. Brady Worldwide, Inc. c. Master Lock. IDENTIFICATION FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 230553 -5 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  2. Anodized aluminum hasp with erasable label surface; size minimum 7-1/4 x 3 inches (184 x 76 mm). B. Valve Lockout Devices: 1. Manufacturers: a. Seton Identification Products. b. Brady Worldwide, Inc. c. Master Lock. 2. Nylon device preventing access to valve operator, accepting lock shackle. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 PREPARATION A. Degrease and clean surfaces to receive adhesive for identification materials. 3.2 INSTALLATION A. Division 01 Section “Quality Requirements”: Manufacturer's instructions. B. Install identifying devices after completion of coverings and painting. C. Install plastic or aluminum engraved nameplates with corrosion-resistant mechanical fasteners, or adhesive, as specified. In outdoor locations, where lifetime of nameplates is limited, fasteners shall be removable screws or bolts for ease of nameplate replacement. D. Install labels with sufficient adhesive to ensure permanent adhesion and seal with clear lacquer. For unfinished canvas covering, apply paint primer before applying labels. E. Install tags using corrosion resistant chain. Number tags consecutively by location. F. Identify items of mechanical equipment such as fans, terminal units, air handling units, pumps, heat transfer equipment, tanks, and water treatment devices with plastic nameplates. Small devices, such as in-line pumps, may be identified with tags. G. Identify control panels and major control components outside panels with plastic nameplates. H. Identify valves in main and branch piping with metal tags. I. Tag automatic controls, instruments, and relays. Key to control schematic. J. Identify piping, concealed or exposed, with plastic pipe markers. Use tags on piping 3/4 inch (20 mm) diameter and smaller. Identify service, flow direction, and pressure. Install in clear view and align with axis of piping. Locate identification not to exceed IDENTIFICATION FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 230553 -6 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  20 feet (6 m)on straight runs including risers and drops, at each branch and riser take.off, adjacent to each valve and tee, at each side of penetration of structure or enclosure, and at each obstruction. K. Identify ductwork with polyester labels. Identify with air handling unit identification number and area served. Locate identification at air handling unit, at each side of penetration of structure or enclosure, and at each obstruction. L. Identify duct access doors at fire dampers, smoke dampers, and smoke detectors with 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) lettering to indicate the fire protection device(s) within, in accordance with NFPA 90A. M. Provide ceiling dots with label-maker labels to locate valves, dampers and equipment above T-bar type panel ceilings. Locate in corner of panel closest to equipment. N. Secure valve tag chart on an easily accessible wall in the mechanical room or in a location as otherwise directed by the Architect. 3.3 COORDINATION WITH EXISTING EQUIPMENT A. Where an existing equipment identification system is involved, the new system shall be coordinated and compatible with the existing system. END OF SECTION 230553 IDENTIFICATION FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 230553 -7 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  SECTION 230593 TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR MECHANICAL SYSTEMS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SECTION INCLUDES A. Testing, Adjustment, and Balancing of Air Systems. B. Testing, Adjustment, and Balancing of Hydronic, and Recirculated Plumbing Hot Water Systems. C. Measurement of Final Operating Condition of HVAC Systems. 1.2 RELATED SECTIONS A. Division 01 Section “Quality Requirements”: Testing laboratory services: Employment of testing agency and payment for services. B. Division 01 Section “General Commissioning Requirements.” 1.3 REFERENCES A. AABC -National Standards for Total System Balance. B. ADC -Test Code for Grilles, Registers, and Diffusers. C. ANSI Z9.5 – Laboratory Ventilation. D. ASHRAE 111 -Practices for Measurement, Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing of Building Heating, Ventilation, Air-conditioning, and Refrigeration Systems. E. NEBB -Procedural Standards for Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing of Environmental Systems. F. SMACNA -HVAC Systems Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing. 1.4 DEFINITIONS A. AABC: Associated Air Balance Council. B. ASHRAE: American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Engineers. C. NEBB: National Environmental Balancing Bureau. D. SMACNA: Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors’ National Association. E. TAB: Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing. TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR MECHANICAL SYSTEMS 230593 -1 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  1.5 SUBMITTALS A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Submittal Procedures.” B. Submit name of TAB Agency for approval within 30 days after award of Contract. C. Design Review Reports: 1. Submit prior to commencement of construction under provisions of Division 01 Section “Quality Requirements.” 2. Review the Contract Documents and indicate deficiencies in systems that would prevent proper testing, adjusting, and balancing of systems and equipment to achieve specified performance. D. Preliminary Report Submittals: 1. Prior to commencing work of this Section, and no more than 30 days after approval of TAB Agency submittals, submit report forms or outlines indicating adjusting, balancing, and equipment data required, with columns of design data filled in. By means of plan views, equipment profiles, and similar graphical descriptions, indicate where measurements will be taken. 2. Submit the procedures to be used. E. Field Reports: Submit draft copies of report for review prior to final acceptance of Project. Provide final copies for Architect/Engineer and for inclusion in operating and maintenance manuals. F. Provide reports in letter size, 3-ring binder manuals, complete with index page and indexing tabs, with cover identification at front and side. Include set of reduced drawings with air outlets and equipment identified to correspond with data sheets and indicating thermostat locations. G. Include detailed procedures, agenda, sample report forms and copy of AABC National Project Performance Guaranty prior to commencing system balance. H. Test Reports: Indicate data on AABC National Standards for Total System Balance forms, or forms prepared following ASHRAE 111, or NEBB forms, or forms containing information indicated in Schedules. 1.6 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Perform total system balance in accordance with AABC National Standards for Field Measurement and Instrumentation, Total System Balance; or ASHRAE 111; or NEBB Procedural Standards for Testing, Balancing and Adjusting of Environmental Systems. 1.7 QUALIFICATIONS A. Agency: Company specializing in the testing, adjusting, and balancing of systems TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR MECHANICAL SYSTEMS 230593 -2 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  specified in this Section with minimum 3 years’ experience and certified by AABC or NEBB, or equivalent experience which would qualify for membership in these testing organizations. Agency shall be one of those listed under paragraph 3.01 AGENCIES in this Section. B. Perform Work under supervision of AABC Certified Test and Balance Engineer, NEBB Certified Testing, Balancing and Adjusting Supervisor, or registered Professional Engineer experienced in performance of this Work and licensed at the place where the Project is located. C. Certification by the National Balancing Council (NBC) (an affiliate of the National Comfort Institute (NCI)) will not be allowed as a substitute for the specified qualifications. 1.8 SEQUENCING A. Sequence work under the provisions of Division 01 Section “Summary.” B. Sequence work to commence after completion of systems or portions of work, and schedule completion of work before Substantial Completion of Project. 1.9 SCHEDULING A. Schedule and provide assistance in final adjustment and test of life safety system with Fire Authority. B. Schedule smoke testing of laboratory hoods with Fire Authority. PART 2 -PRODUCTS (Not Used) PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 AGENCIES A. Tekon Technical Consultants, Rochester, NH. Contact: Charles Corlin, (603) 335.3080. B. Hood T.A.B. LLC, Andover, MA. Contact: Michael Hood, (978) 474-7595. C. NETB Associates LLC, East Kingston, NH. Contact: Frank Collamore, (978) 270.7547. D. Airadigm Solutions, 40 King St, Auburn, NH 03032, (603) 262-9292. E. No Substitutions. TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR MECHANICAL SYSTEMS 230593 -3 3.2 EXAMINATION A. Verify that systems are complete and operating correctly in accordance with sequence of operations before commencing work. Ensure the following conditions: 1. Systems are started and operating in a safe and normal condition. 2. Temperature control systems are installed complete and operable. 3. Proper thermal overload protection is in place for electrical equipment. 4. Final filters are clean and in place. If required, install temporary media in addition to final filters. 5. Duct systems are clean of debris. 6. Fans are rotating correctly. 7. Fire and volume dampers are in place and open. 8. Air coil fins are cleaned and combed. 9. Access doors are closed and duct end caps are in place. 10. Air outlets are installed and connected. 11. Duct system leakage is minimized. 12. Hydronic systems are flushed, filled, and vented. 13. Pumps are rotating correctly. 14. Proper strainer baskets are clean and in place. 15. Service and balance valves are open. B. Submit field reports. Report to the responsible Subcontractors, defects and deficiencies noted during performance of services which prevent system balance. Submit list of locations where the Contractor needs to provide additional balancing devices. C. Beginning of work means acceptance of existing conditions. 3.3 PREPARATION A. Provide instruments required for testing, adjusting, and balancing operations. Make instruments available to Architect/Engineer to facilitate spot checks during testing. 3.4 INSTALLATION TOLERANCES A. Air Handling Systems: Adjust to within plus or minus 5 percent of design for supply TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR MECHANICAL SYSTEMS 230593 -4 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  systems and plus or minus 10 percent of design for return and exhaust systems. B. Air Outlets and Inlets: Adjust total to within plus 10 percent and minus 5 percent of design to space. Adjust outlets and inlets in space to within plus or minus 10 percent of design. C. Hydronic Systems: Adjust to within plus or minus 10 percent of design. 3.5 ADJUSTING A. Ensure recorded data represents actual measured or observed conditions. B. Permanently mark settings of valves, dampers, and other adjustment devices allowing settings to be restored. Set and lock memory stops. C. After adjustment, take measurements to verify balance has not been disrupted or that such disruption has been rectified. D. Leave systems in proper working order, replacing belt guards, closing access doors, closing doors to electrical switch boxes, and restoring thermostats to specified settings. E. For belt driven equipment, provide sheave and belt modifications and/or replacements as required to ensure design flow rates as specified. Variable-frequency drives shall generally be set near full speed, between 60 Hz and 55 Hz output frequency, to preserve as much frequency range as possible for controllability. 3.6 AIR SYSTEM PROCEDURE A. Adjust air handling and distribution systems to provide design supply, return, and exhaust air quantities. B. Make air quantity measurements in ducts by Pitot tube traverse of entire cross sectional area of duct. C. Measure air quantities at air inlets and outlets. D. Adjust distribution system to obtain uniform space temperatures free from objectionable drafts and noise. E. Use volume control devices to regulate air quantities only to extent that adjustments do not create objectionable air motion or sound levels. Effect volume control by duct internal devices such as dampers and splitters. F. Vary total system air quantities by adjustment of fan speeds. Vary branch air quantities by damper regulation. G. Provide system schematic (in floor-plan or line-diagram view) with outlets and inlets numbered with the reference numbers used in the TAB Agent’s tabular data, and with required and actual air quantities recorded at each outlet or inlet. TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR MECHANICAL SYSTEMS 230593 -5 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  H. Measure static air pressure conditions on air supply units, including pressure drops across filters, coils, dampers, mixing boxes, and heat recovery devices, and total pressure across the fan. Make allowances for 50 percent loading of filters, and indicate actual filter drop as well as the allowances. Provide equipment diagram indicating internal components and measurement points. I. Adjust outside air automatic dampers, outside air, return air, and exhaust dampers for design conditions. Adjust at minimum position and maximum position and use manual dampers and actuator limit stops to minimize differences. J. Measure temperature conditions across outside air, return air, and exhaust dampers to check leakage. K. Where modulating dampers are provided, take measurements and balance at extreme conditions. Balance variable volume systems at maximum air flow rate, full cooling, and at minimum air flow rate, full heating. L. Where available fan capacity is less than total flow requirements of individual system parts (due to system diversity), full flow in one part may be simulated by temporary restriction of flow to other parts. M. Coordinate with Division 23 Section “Instrumentation and Controls for Mechanical Systems” for calibration of air handling units’ airflow monitoring stations. Calibrate airflow monitoring stations to ensure that airflow readings from airflow monitoring stations correspond with actual airflows. N. Coordinate with Division 23 Section “Instrumentation and Controls for Mechanical Systems” for calibration of air handling units’ static pressure sensors and determination of pressure setpoints. O. Set pattern-control vanes and other devices in air inlets and outlets to provide the spread and throw patterns indicated, without objectionable noise or air motion to the occupants. Split the flow of linear slot diffusers in directions as required for good coverage. At completion, patterns shall be uniform and pleasing to the eye. P. Measure building static pressure and adjust supply, return, and exhaust air systems to provide required relationship between each to maintain approximately 0.05 inches WG (12.5 Pa) positive static pressure near the building entries. Q. Measure building static pressure and adjust supply and exhaust air systems to provide required relationship between each to maintain approximately 0.05 inches WG (12.5 Pa) negative static pressure between the chemistry prep rooms and the adjacent classrooms when the fume hoods are operating. During these measurements, the other air systems serving this room shall be in full occupied-mode operation. 3.7 WATER SYSTEM PROCEDURE A. Adjust water systems to provide required or design quantities. B. Use calibrated Venturi tubes, orifices, or other metered fittings and pressure gauges to TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR MECHANICAL SYSTEMS 230593 -6 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  determine flow rates for system balance. Where flow metering devices are not installed, base flow balance on temperature difference across various heat transfer elements in the system. C. Adjust systems to provide specified pressure drops and flows through heat transfer elements prior to thermal testing. Perform balancing by measurement of temperature differential in conjunction with air balancing. D. Effect system balance with automatic control valves fully open to heat transfer elements. E. Effect adjustment of water distribution systems by means of balancing cocks, valves, and fittings. Do not use service or shut-off valves for balancing. F. Where available pump capacity is less than total flow requirements of individual system parts (due to system diversity), full flow in one part may be simulated by temporary restriction of flow to other parts. G. Coordinate with Division 23 Section “Instrumentation and Controls for Mechanical Systems” for calibration of pump static pressure sensors and determination of pressure setpoints. H. When the available pump head is more than 15 percent above the required head to meet the design flow, trim the pump impeller to bring the head within 100 to 110 percent of the required head to meet the design flow. At least one balancing valve in the system, and one balancing valve per each multi-circuit sub-main branch served by a branch balancing valve, shall be fully open when balancing is complete. 3.8 PROJECT CLOSEOUT A. At final inspection, recheck random selections of data recorded in report. Recheck points or areas as selected and witnessed by the Architect. B. Check and adjust systems approximately 6 months after final acceptance and submit report. C. Retests: If random tests elicit a measured flow deviation of 10 percent or more from, that recorded in the certified report listings, at 10 percent or more of the rechecked selections, the report shall be automatically rejected. In the event the report is rejected, systems shall be readjusted and tested, new data recorded, new certified reports submitted, and new inspection tests made. 3.9 SCHEDULES A. Equipment Requiring Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing: 1. Plumbing Recirculation 2. Packaged Roof Top Heating/Cooling Units TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR MECHANICAL SYSTEMS 230593 -7 3. Fans 4. Air Filters 5. Air Inlets and Outlets 6. Pumps 7. Hydronic heating 8. Cabinet Unit Heaters 9. Kitchen Hood 10. Boilers 11. Energy Recovery Units B. Report Forms: 1. Title Page: a. Name of Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing Agency b. Address of Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing Agency c. Telephone number of Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing Agency d. Project name e. Project location f. Project Architect g. Project Engineer h. Project Contractor i. Project altitude j. Report date 2. Summary Comments: a. Design versus final performance b. Notable characteristics of system c. Description of systems operation sequence d. Summary of outdoor and exhaust flows to indicate amount of building TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR MECHANICAL SYSTEMS 230593 -8 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  pressurization e. Nomenclature used throughout report f. Test conditions 3. Instrument List: a. Instrument b. Manufacturer c. Model number d. Serial number e. Range f. Calibration date 4. Electric Motors: a. Manufacturer b. Model/Frame c. HP/BHP d. Phase, voltage, amperage; nameplate, actual, no load e. RPM f. Service factor g. Starter size, rating, heater elements h. Sheave Make/Size/Bore 5. V-Belt Drive: a. Identification/location b. Required driven RPM c. Driven sheave, diameter and RPM d. Belt, size and quantity e. Motor sheave diameter and RPM f. Center to center distance, maximum, minimum, and actual TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR MECHANICAL SYSTEMS 230593 -9 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  6. Variable Frequency Drive (VFD): a. Motor(s) served b. Manufacturer c. Model/Frame d. HP/BHP ratings e. Phase, voltage, amperage; nameplate, actual, no load f. Input and output frequency (Hz) g. Reference speed command from control system h. Carrier frequency setting i. Speeds programmed out for vibration j. Speed adjustment for motor balancing (if allowed) 7. Pump Data: a. Identification/number b. Manufacturer c. Size/model d. Impeller e. Service f. Design flow rate, pressure drop, BHP g. Actual flow rate, pressure drop, BHP h. Discharge pressure i. Suction pressure j. Total operating head pressure k. Shut off, discharge and suction pressures l. Shut off, total head pressure 8. Combustion Test: a. Boiler manufacturer TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR MECHANICAL SYSTEMS 230593 -10 Bid Pack No2 b. Model number c. Serial number d. Fuel type e. Firing rate f. Fuel tank fill level g. Oil pump inlet pressure/vacuum h. Overfire draft i. Gas meter timing dial size j. Gas meter time per revolution k. Gas pressure at meter outlet l. Gas flow rate m. Heat input n. Burner manifold gas pressure o. Percent carbon monoxide (CO2) p. Percent carbon dioxide (CO2) q. Percent oxygen (O2) r. Percent excess air s. Flue gas temperature at outlet t. Ambient temperature u. Net stack temperature v. Percent stack loss w. Percent combustion efficiency x. Heat output 9. Cooling Coil Data: a. Identification/number b. Location TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR MECHANICAL SYSTEMS 230593 -11 Bid Pack No2 c. Service d. Manufacturer e. Rows, and fins per inch f. Air flow, design and actual g. Entering air DB temperature, design and actual h. Entering air WB temperature, design and actual i. Leaving air DB temperature, design and actual j. Leaving air WB temperature, design and actual k. Water flow, design and actual l. Water pressure drop, design and actual m. Entering water temperature, design and actual n. Leaving water temperature, design and actual o. Refrigerant saturated suction temperature, design and actual p. Refrigerant superheat temperature q. Air pressure drop, design and actual 10. Air Moving Equipment: a. Location b. Manufacturer c. Model number d. Serial number e. Arrangement/Class/Discharge f. Air flow, specified and actual g. Return air flow, specified and actual h. Outside air flow, specified and actual i. Total static pressure (total external), specified and actual j. Inlet pressure TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR MECHANICAL SYSTEMS 230593 -12 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  k. Discharge pressure l. Component pressure drops m. Sheave Make/Size/Bore n. Number of Belts/Make/Size o. Fan RPM 11. Return Air/Outside Air Data: a. Identification/location b. Design air flow c. Actual air flow d. Design return air flow e. Actual return air flow f. Design outside air flow g. Actual outside air flow h. Return air temperature i. Outside air temperature j. Required mixed air temperature k. Actual mixed air temperature l. Design outside/return air ratio m. Actual outside/return air ratio 12. Exhaust Fan Data: a. Location b. Manufacturer c. Model number d. Serial number e. Air flow, specified and actual f. Total static pressure (total external), specified and actual TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR MECHANICAL SYSTEMS 230593 -13 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  g. Inlet pressure  h. Discharge pressure  i. Sheave Make/Size/Bore  j. Number of Belts/Make/Size  k. Fan RPM  13. Duct Traverse:  a. System zone/branch  b. Duct size  c. Area  d. Design velocity  e. Design air flow  f. Test velocity  g. Test air flow  h. Duct static pressure  i. Air temperature  j. Air correction factor  14. Terminal Unit Data:  a. Manufacturer  b. Identification/number  c. Location  d. Model number  e. Size  f. Minimum static pressure  g. Minimum design air flow  h. Minimum actual air flow  i. Maximum design air flow  TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR MECHANICAL SYSTEMS 230593 -14 Barnstead School District, SAU 86 Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations Bid Pack No2  May 20, 2025 TTG Proj No. 5199  j.  Maximum actual air flow  k.  Inlet static pressure  15.  Air Distribution Test Sheet:  a.  Air terminal number  b.  Room number/location  c.  Terminal type  d.  Terminal size  e.  Area factor  f.  Design velocity  g.  Design air flow  h.  Test (final) velocity  i.  Test (final) air flow  j.  Percent of design air flow  END OF SECTION 230593  TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR MECHANICAL SYSTEMS 230593 -15 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  SECTION 230713 DUCT INSULATION PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SECTION INCLUDES A. Ductwork Insulation. B. Duct Liner. C. Sound Lagging Insulation. 1.2 RELATED SECTIONS A. Division 23 Section “Identification for HVAC Piping and Equipment.” B. Division 23 Section “Metal Ducts”: Factory-insulated flexible ductwork. C. Division 23 Section “Metal Ducts”: Ductwork. 1.3 REFERENCES A. ASTM B209 -Standard Specification for Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Sheet and Plate. B. ASTM C177 -Standard Test Method for Steady-State Heat Flux Measurements and Thermal Transmission Properties by Means of the Guarded Hot Plate Apparatus. C. ASTM C209 -Standard Test Methods for Cellulosic Fiber Insulating Board. D. ASTM C423 -Standard Test Method for Sound Absorption and Sound Absorption Coefficients by the Reverberation Room Method. E. ASTM C518 -Standard Test Method for Steady-State Thermal Transmission Properties by Means of the Heat Flow Meter Apparatus. F. ASTM C534 -Standard Specification for Preformed Flexible Elastomeric Cellular Thermal Insulation in Sheet and Tubular Form. G. ASTM C553 -Standard Specification for Mineral Fiber Blanket Thermal Insulation for Commercial and Industrial Applications. H. ASTM C612 -Standard Specification for Mineral Fiber Block and Board Thermal Insulation. I. ASTM C916 -Standard Specification for Adhesives for Duct Thermal Insulation. J. ASTM C1071 -Standard Specification for Thermal and Acoustical Insulation (Glass DUCT INSULATION 230713 -1 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  Fiber, Duct Lining Material). K. ASTM C1104 -Standard Test Method for Determining the Water Vapor Sorption of Unfaced Mineral Fiber Insulation. L. ASTM C1136 -Standard Specification for Flexible, Low Permeance Vapor Retarders for Thermal Insulation. M. ASTM D1056 -Standard Specification for Flexible Cellular Materials -Sponge or Expanded Rubber. N. ASTM D1622 -Standard Test Method for Apparent Density of Rigid Cellular Plastics. O. ASTM E84 -Standard Test Method for Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials. P. ASTM E90 -Standard Test Method for Laboratory Measurement of Airborne Sound Transmission Loss of Building Partitions and Elements. Q. ASTM E96 -Standard Test Methods for Water Vapor Transmission of Materials. R. ASTM E119 (UL 263) -Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Building Construction and Materials. S. ASTM E136 -Standard Test Method for Behavior of Materials in a Vertical Tube Furnace at 750 degrees C. T. ASTM E162 -Standard Test Method for Surface Flammability of Materials Using a Radiant Heat Energy Source. U. ASTM E814 -Standard Test Method for Fire Tests of Penetration Firestop Systems. V. ASTM E2336 -Standard Test Methods for Fire Resistive Grease Duct Enclosure Systems. W. ASTM G21 -Standard Practice for Determining Resistance of Synthetic Polymeric Materials to Fungi. X. ISO 6944 -1985 -Fire Resistance Tests -Ventilation Ducts. Y. NAIMA -National Insulation Standards. Z. NFPA 96 -Standard for Ventilation Control and Fire Protection of Commercial Cooking Operations. AA. NFPA 255 -Standard Method of Test of Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials. BB. SMACNA -HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible. CC. UL 94 -Tests for Flammability of Plastic Materials for Parts in Devices and Appliances. DUCT INSULATION 230713 -2 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  DD. UL 723 -Standard for Test for Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials. 1.4 SUBMITTALS A. Division 01 Section “Submittal Procedures”. B. Product Data: Provide product description, thermal characteristics, list of materials and thickness for each service, and locations. 1.5 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Manufacturer Qualifications: Company specializing in manufacturing the Products specified in this Section with minimum 3 years’ experience. B. Applicator Qualifications: Company specializing in performing the work of this Section with minimum 3 years’ experience. 1.6 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS A. Materials: Flame spread/smoke developed rating of 25/50 in accordance with ASTM E84, NFPA 255 and UL 723. For elastomeric foam insulation, rating shall apply for thicknesses up to 2 inches (50 mm). B. Insulation materials shall be asbestos free. No fibers with dimensions similar to asbestos fibers shall be released from any material. 1.7 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND PROTECTION A. Division 01 Section “Product Requirements”: Transport, handle, store, and protect products. B. Accept materials on site in original factory packaging, labeled with manufacturer's identification, including product density and thickness. C. Protect insulation from weather and construction traffic, dirt, water, chemical, and mechanical damage, by storing in original wrapping. 1.8 ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS A. Division 01 Section “Product Requirements”: Environmental conditions affecting products on site. B. Maintain ambient temperatures and conditions required by manufacturers of adhesives, mastics, and insulation cements. C. Maintain temperature during and after installation for minimum period of 24 hours. DUCT INSULATION 230713 -3 PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 MANUFACTURERS A. Glass and Mineral Fiber Products: 1. Knauf Insulation. 2. Certainteed Corporation. 3. Johns Manville. 4. Owens Corning. 5. No substitutions. B. Elastomeric Foam Products: 1. Armacell LLC. 2. K-Flex USA. 3. No substitutions. C. Polyisocyanurate Rigid Board Insulation 1. Hunter Xci 286 Foil-Faced 2. Or approved equal. D. Sound Lagging Insulation: 1. Sound Seal -Industrial Division Lag Series. E. Glass Fiber Insulation Sealing Tapes: 1. Venture Tape Corporation. 2. 3M Company. 3. Ideal Tape Co., division of American Biltrite Inc. 4. Nashua Tape Products, division of Berry Plastics Corp. 5. No substitutions. F. Accessories: 1. Ceel-Co division of Johns Manville (product: plastic jacket systems). 2. Foster Products, division of Specialty Construction Brands, Inc., a subsidiary of DUCT INSULATION 230713 -4 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  H.B. Fuller (mastics, sealants, reinforcing membranes, and accessories). 3. Johns Manville (products: Super-Seal acrylic polymer coatings, Zeston plastic jacket systems). 4. Pabco/Childers Metals, division of ITW Insulation Systems (products: metal jacket systems, and accessories). 5. Vac Systems International (product: Tough Coat acrylic polymer mechanical insulation repair coating). 6. Venture Tape Corporation (product: Jacket for outdoor insulation). 2.2 GLASS FIBER, FLEXIBLE A. Insulation: ASTM C553; flexible, noncombustible blanket. 1. 'K' ('Ksi') value: ASTM C518, 0.27 at 75 °F (0.039 at 24 °C). 2. Maximum service temperature: 250 °F (121 °C) faced and 350 °F (176 °C) unfaced. 3. Maximum moisture absorption: 0.20 percent by volume. 4. Minimum density: 1.0 lb/cu. ft. (16 kg/m3). B. Vapor Barrier Jacket: 1. ASTM C1136, Kraft paper reinforced with glass fiber yarn and bonded to vapor barrier film. Facing as required for the application. Integral staple flap on one edge. a. Aluminum Faced: FSK (aluminum foil-scrim-kraft) construction. b. White Faced: PSK (polypropylene-scrim-kraft) construction. 2. Moisture vapor transmission: ASTM E96; 0.02 perm. 3. Suitable for insulation surface temperatures up to 150 °F (66 °C). 4. Overlap longitudinal laps and butt strips. 5. Secure with outward clinch expanding staples and vapor barrier mastic and pressure sensitive tape. C. Vapor Barrier Tape: See article “Glass Fiber Insulation Sealing Tape” in this Section. D. Tie Wire: Annealed steel, 16 ga (1.5 mm). DUCT INSULATION 230713 -5 2.3 GLASS FIBER, RIGID A. Insulation: ASTM C612; rigid, noncombustible blanket. Supplied in board form. 1. 'K' ('Ksi') value: ASTM C518, 0.24 at 75 °F (0.036 at 24 °C). 2. Maximum service temperature: 450 °F (232 °C). 3. Maximum moisture absorption: 1.0 percent by volume. 4. Density: 3.0 lb/cu. ft. (48 kg/cu m). B. Vapor Barrier Jacket: 1. ASTM C1136, kraft paper reinforced with glass fiber yarn and bonded to aluminized film. Facing as required for the application. a. Aluminum Faced: FSK (foil-scrim-kraft) construction b. White Faced: ASJ (all-service jacket) construction. 2. Moisture vapor transmission: ASTM E96; 0.02 perm. 3. Suitable for insulation surface temperatures up to 150 °F (66 °C). 4. Overlap longitudinal laps and butt strips. 5. Secure insulation with mechanical fasteners to substrate, and seal jacket with pressure sensitive tape. C. Vapor Barrier Tape: See article “Glass Fiber Insulation Sealing Tape” in this Section. 2.4 GLASS FIBER, SEMI-RIGID A. Insulation: ASTM C612; semi-rigid, noncombustible blanket, with fibers oriented perpendicular to insulation surface to provide compressive strength while maintaining flexibility. Supplied in roll form, suitable for application on rounded shapes such as pipes, tanks, ducts, vessels, and other similar round and irregular shapes. 1. 'K' ('Ksi') value: ASTM C518, 0.24 at 75 °F (0.036 at 24 °C). 2. Maximum service temperature: 450 °F (232 °C). 3. Maximum moisture absorption: 1.0 percent by volume. 4. Density: 2.5 lb/cu. ft. (40 kg/cu m). B. Vapor Barrier Jacket: 1. ASTM C1136, kraft paper with glass fiber yarn and bonded to aluminized film. DUCT INSULATION 230713 -6 Facing as required for the application. a. Aluminum Faced: FSK (foil-scrim-kraft) construction b. White Faced: ASJ (all-service jacket) construction. 2. Moisture vapor transmission: ASTM E96; 0.02 perm. 3. Suitable for insulation surface temperatures up to 150 °F (66 °C). 4. Overlap longitudinal laps and butt strips. 5. Secure with outward clinch expanding staples and vapor barrier mastic and pressure sensitive tape. C. Vapor Barrier Tape: See article “Glass Fiber Insulation Sealing Tape” in this Section. 2.5 GLASS FIBER, PREFORMED PIPE COVERING A. Insulation: ASTM C547; rigid molded, noncombustible. 1. 'K' ('Ksi') value: ASTM C177, 0.24 Btu-in/(hr-sq.ft-°F) at 75 °F (0.035 W/m-K at 24 °C). 2. Maximum service temperature: 850 °F (454 °C). 3. Maximum moisture absorption: 0.2 percent by volume. B. Vapor Barrier Jacket: 1. ASTM C1136, White kraft paper with glass fiber yarn, bonded to aluminized film. 2. Moisture vapor transmission: ASTM E96; 0.02 perm-inches. C. Tie Wire: 0.048 inch (1.22 mm) stainless steel with twisted ends on maximum 12 inch (300 mm) centers. D. Vapor Barrier Lap Adhesive: Compatible with insulation. E. Vapor Barrier Tape: Provide self-adhesive butt strips furnished by the insulation manufacturer, with finish to match the insulation outer finish. F. Insulating Cement/Mastic: ASTM C195; hydraulic setting on mineral wool. G. Insulating Cement: ASTM C449/C449M. 2.6 GLASS FIBER INSULATION SEALING TAPE A. Self-adhesive tape with integral vapor barrier, pressure sensitive acrylic-based or rubber-based adhesive, and release liner strip. Width 3 inch (76 mm) nominal. DUCT INSULATION 230713 -7 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  B. Manufactured by VentureTape, by the insulation manufacturer, or by one of the other tape manufacturers listed in the article “Manufacturers” in this Section. C. Types: 1. For rigid and semi-rigid insulations, tape shall be reinforced type. For flexible “duct wrap” insulation, tape shall be either reinforced or non-reinforced. 2. White or aluminum outer surface to match the insulation. 3. Reinforced: Kraft paper reinforced with glass fiber yarn and bonded to vapor barrier layer. a. Aluminum Finish with FSK: VentureTape 1525CW. b. White Finish with ASJ: VentureTape 1540CW c. White Finish with PSK: VentureTape 1531CW. 4. Non-Reinforced: Foil insulation tape. Dead-soft temper 2 mil (0.05 mm) thick aluminum foil, without reinforcement. Hand-tearable. a. Venture Tape 3520CW. 5. Performance: a. Peel Adhesion: PSTC-101 with 20 minute dwell, 45 oz/in. (12.5 N / 25 mm). b. Shear Adhesion: PSTC-107, 2.2 psi (15.2 kPa) after 24 hours. c. Tensile Strength: PSTC-131: 1) Reinforced Types: 40 lb/in. (180.8 N / 25 mm). 2) Non-reinforced Types: 21 lb/in. (94.9 N / 25 mm). d. Elongation: PSTC 131, 6 percent maximum. e. Service Temperature: -40 to 240 °F (-40 to 116 °C). f. UL 723 listed or classified (flame/smoke rating). 2.7 ELASTOMERIC FOAM A. Approved Products: 1. Armacell: AP Armaflex and AP Armaflex FS sheet insulation. 2. K-Flex USA: Insul-Sheet S2S and K-Flex LS sheet insulation. DUCT INSULATION 230713 -8 B. Insulation: ASTM C534; flexible, cellular elastomeric, molded or sheet. 1. 'K' ('Ksi') value: ASTM C177; 0.277 Btu-in/(h-ft2-°) at 75 degrees F (0.04 W/m-K at 24 °C). 2. Minimum service temperature: -70 °F (-57 °C) (flexible to -40 °F (-40 °C)). 3. Maximum service temperature: 220 °F (104 °C). 4. Maximum moisture absorption: ASTM C209, 0.2 percent by volume; or ASTM D1056, 5 percent by weight. 5. Moisture vapor transmission: ASTM E96; 0.08 perm-inches (0.116 ng/(s-m-Pa)). 6. Connection: Waterproof vapor barrier adhesive. 7. Density: 3.0 to 6.0 lb/cu ft (48 to 96 kg/cu m). C. Elastomeric Foam Adhesive: Air dried, contact adhesive, compatible with insulation. 2.8 Polyisocyanurate Rigid Board Insulation: Polyisocyanurate sheets with factory applied reinforced foil facers on each side for exposed interior and outdoor applications. Comply with ASTM C 1289, Type I. A. Comply with ASTM D 1621, compressive strength of 25 psi (Grade 3). B. Comply with ASTM E 96, moisture vapor permeance of 0.04 perm-inch. C. Comply with ASTM E 84 flame spread index less than 25 and smoke developed index less than 250. D. Suitable for continuous service at temperatures ranging from -100 to 250 deg F. E. Thermal conductivity (k-value) shall not exceed 0.159 Btu x in./hr. x sq ft x deg F at 75 deg F mean temperature. F. Requires field-applied jacket as follows: a. Self-Adhesive Outdoor Jacket: Heavy duty, zero permeability, multi-layered laminate coated with a cold weather acrylic adhesive. Resistant to weathering, mold, UV and extreme environmental conditions. Self-adhering laminate jacketing system Designed for installation over insulation located aboveground outdoors. 1) Available Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, manufacturers offering products that may be incorporated into the Work include, the following: a) VentureClad 1579GCW-WME. b) Or approved equal. DUCT INSULATION 230713 -9 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  2) Embossed white exterior surface. 3) Absolute vapor barrier providing zero permeability, including overlap seams. 4) Minimum product thickness of 24 mils, excluding liner. 5) Peel adhesion of 100 ounces per inch. 6) Tensile strength of 130 pounds per inch. 7) Puncture force of 58 pounds. 8) Flame-spread index shall be 20 or less and smoke-developed index shall be 30 or less as tested by ASTM E 84. 9) Suitable for continuous service from -94 deg F to +248 deg F. 10) Matching jointing and seaming tape. 2.9 ELASTOMERIC FOAM DUCT LINER A. Products: 1. Armacell, AP Armaflex and AP Armaflex FS black or gray sheet duct liner insulation. 2. K-Flex USA: Insul-Sheet S2S and K-Flex LS sheet insulation. 3. No substitutions. B. Insulation: ASTM C534; flexible cellular elastomeric foam, molded or sheet, factory-treated with antimicrobial agent. 1. 'K' ('Ksi') value: ASTM C177; 0.25 Btu-in/(h-ft2-°F) at 75 °F (0.04 W/m-K at 24 °C). 2. Minimum service temperature: -70 °F (-57 °C) (flexible to -40 °F (-40 degrees C)). 3. Maximum service temperature: 180 °F (82 °C). 4. Maximum moisture absorption: ASTM C209, 0.2 percent by volume; or ASTM D1056, 5 percent by weight. 5. Moisture vapor transmission: ASTM E96; 0.20 perm-inches (1.16x10-10 Kg/(s.m-Pa)). 6. Maximum velocity on airstream side: ASTM C1071; 6,000 fpm (30.5 m/sec). 7. Connection: Waterproof vapor barrier adhesive. 8. Density: 3.0 to 6.0 lb/cu. ft. (48 to 96 kg/cu m). DUCT INSULATION 230713 -10 9. Minimum sound absorption coefficients, ASTM C423, Type A mounting (sabins/sq. ft): a. At 250 Hz center band frequency: 0.17 for 1 inch (25 mm) thickness. b. At 500 Hz center band frequency: 0.80 for 1 inch (25 mm) thickness. c. At 1000 Hz center band frequency: 0.32 for 1 inch (25 mm) thickness. d. NRC: 0.50 for 1 inch (25 mm) thickness. C. Elastomeric Foam Adhesive: Air dried, contact adhesive, compatible with insulation. D. Self-Adhesive Coating: At the Contractor’s option, the insulation may be provided with a factory-applied self-adhesive coating with peel-off release liner. If the Manufacturer recommends installation of self-adhesive liner without mechanical pin fasteners at all velocities, the pins may be omitted. Provide suitable cleaner for the ductwork to ensure adhesion. 2.10 SOUND LAGGING INSULATION (Installed inside roof curbs under Roof Top Equipment for noise control) A. Acoustical lagging and thermal insulation, in blanket form shipped in rolls, consisting of a loaded vinyl noise barrier with a scrim-reinforced aluminum foil vapor retarder facing on one side, with a quilted fiberglass decoupler. Service temperatures: -10 to 180 °F (-23 to 82 °C) for outer lag layer, -20 to 350 °F (-28 to 176 °C) for decoupler layer. Thermal insulation values: R-factor 1.0 h-ft2-°F/Btu (0.176 m2-K/W) for outer lag layer, 4.0 h-ft2-°F/Btu-inch (0.704 m-K/W) for decoupler layer. Passes UL-94. Class A flame/smoke rating 25/50 or better per ASTM E-84. B. Model B-20 LAG/QFA-9: Sound transmission class (STC) 34 per ASTM E90, 2 lb/sq.ft (9.76 kg/m2) lag layer, 0.4 lb/sq.ft (1.95 kg/m2) decoupler layer, 0.23-inch (5.8 mm) thick lag layer, 2-inch (50 mm) nominal thickness decoupler layer. C. Provide matching lag tape. 2.11 FIRE-RATED INSULATION SYSTEMS A. Fire-Rated Blanket: High-temperature, flexible, blanket insulation with FSK jacket that is tested and certified to provide a 1 hour fire rating meeting ASTM E2336 or other standard acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction. Install per manufacturer’s written requirements to meet 1 hour fire resistive rating for Grease Duct Installation. 1. Manufacturer and product: a. Unifrax – FyreWrap Elite b. 3M Fire Barrier Duct Wrap 615+ c. Or Approved Equal DUCT INSULATION 230713 -11 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 EXAMINATION A. Division 01 Section “Project Management and Coordination”: Verification of existing conditions before starting work. B. Verify that ductwork has been tested before applying insulation materials. C. Verify that surfaces are clean, foreign material removed, and dry. D. Verify that insulation materials are clean and dry. Discard any materials that exhibit signs of moisture damage, contamination, mold, mildew, or other biological growth. Discard any materials used in the air handling airstream if they have been exposed to water. 3.2 INSTALLATION A. Division 01 Section “Quality Requirements”: Manufacturer's instructions. B. Install in accordance with NAIMA National Insulation Standards. C. In addition to new ductwork, provide insulation for surfaces of existing ductwork that is uninsulated. Field-verify scope of existing ductwork. D. Provide insulation for surfaces of ductwork, as indicated and specified. Insulation values shall meet or exceed the requirements of ASHRAE 90.1-2010, State Energy Codes, and Table I, whichever is greater. In addition, comply with the other requirements of this Section. E. Insulated Ductwork Conveying Air below Ambient Temperature: 1. Provide insulation with vapor barrier jackets. 2. Finish with tape and vapor barrier jacket. 3. Continue insulation through walls, sleeves, hangers, and other duct penetrations. 4. Insulate entire system including fittings, joints, flanges, fire dampers, flexible connections, and expansion joints. F. Insulated Ductwork Conveying Air above Ambient Temperature: 1. Provide with or without standard vapor barrier jacket. 2. Insulate fittings and joints. Where service access is required, bevel and seal ends of insulation. G. Ductwork Exposed below 10 feet (3 meters) above finished floor in Mechanical Equipment Rooms or below 8 feet (2.4 meters) above finished floor in Finished Spaces: Provide glass fiber rigid insulation with vapor barrier jacket. DUCT INSULATION 230713 -12 H. It is not required to insulate ductwork which is acoustically lined, unless otherwise specified or indicated on the Drawings. I. Do not insulate exposed heating or cooling supply ductwork in the conditioned spaces which it serves, unless otherwise specified or indicated on the Drawings. J. Wherever exposed ductwork for air-conditioned systems passes through non air-conditioned spaces, insulate ductwork with glass fiber rigid insulation with vapor barrier, to prevent condensation. K. Where rigid glass fiber insulation is scheduled, semi-rigid glass fiber insulation may be used on round and flat oval ducts and irregular shapes, and preformed pipe insulation may be used on small diameter round ducts. L. External Duct Insulation Application: 1. Secure insulation with vapor barrier with wires and seal jacket joints with vapor barrier adhesive or tape to match jacket. 2. Secure insulation without vapor barrier with staples, tape, or wires. 3. Install without sag on underside of ductwork. Use adhesive or mechanical fasteners where necessary to prevent sagging. Lift ductwork off trapeze hangers and insert spacers. 4. Seal vapor barrier penetrations by mechanical fasteners with vapor barrier adhesive. 5. Stop and point insulation around access doors and damper operators to allow operation without disturbing wrapping. M. Duct and Plenum Liner Application: 1. Duct dimensions indicated are net inside dimensions required for air flow. 2. Increase duct size to allow for insulation thickness. 3. Provide duct liner where: a. Indicated on the Drawings. b. Specified. 4. Install duct liner in accordance with SMACNA standards. 5. Install elastomeric foam duct liner in accordance with manufacturer’s recommendations. 6. Adhesive: Apply to duct sheet metal for 90 percent coverage. Clean the duct before applying adhesive. DUCT INSULATION 230713 -13 7. Mechanical Fastening: In addition to adhesive, provide mechanical fastening devices meeting the following requirements: a. Are spaced in accordance with SMACNA Standards and Manufacturer’s recommendations. b. When installed, are as corrosion-resistant as G60 coated galvanized steel. c. Will not adversely affect the fire-resistant classification of liner and adhesives. d. Do not damage the liner when applied as recommended by the manufacturer. e. Do not cause leakage in the duct. f. Do not project more than nominally into the airstream. g. Will indefinitely sustain a 50 lb (222 N) tensile dead load test perpendicular to the duct wall. h. Have a permanent, waterproof bond to the duct wall. i. Are the correct length for the specified liner thickness. 8. Self-Adhesive Elastomeric Foam Insulation: If manufacturer’s instructions recommend omitting mechanical pin fasteners at all air velocities, they may be omitted. Clean the duct with recommended liquid cleaner before installing insulation. 9. Seal and smooth liner airstream surface penetrations, cuts, tears, edges, and transverse and longitudinal joints with adhesive or acrylic polymer repair coating, compatible with liner surface coating. 10. Corners: Cut and fit liner in the corners of rectangular duct sections to assure butted edge overlapping. Longitudinal joints in duct liner shall not occur except at the corners of ducts unless the size of the duct and standard liner product dimensions make joints necessary. 11. Transverse Joints: Butt liner neatly without gaps. 12. Provide securely-installed metal nosings that are either channel or zee profile or are integrally-formed from the duct wall over transversely oriented liner edges facing the airstream at fan discharge, at access doors, and at any interval of lined duct preceded by unlined duct. In addition, where velocities exceed 2,000 fpm (10.2 mps), provide metal nosing on upstream edges of liner at every transverse joint. 13. For edges of lining exposed to the airstream that are not protected by metal DUCT INSULATION 230713 -14 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  nosings, coat with adhesive or acrylic polymer repair coating. Cover raw insulation such that no fibers are released. 14. Where dampers, turning vane assemblies or other devices are placed inside of lined duct or fittings, install to not damage the liner or cause erosion of the liner. The use of metal hat sections or other buildout means is optional; when used, secure buildouts to the duct wall with bolts, screws, rivets or welds. 15. Do not install duct liner in fresh air intake ductwork between the outside intake opening and the fan or other air moving device, or within 10 feet (3 m) downstream of a cooling coil or humidifier. N. Inspection Plates and Test Holes: Provide, where required, in ductwork or casings for balance measurements. Test holes shall be factory fabricated, airtight, and noncorrosive with screw cap and gasket. Extend cap through insulation. O. Install insulation after ductwork and equipment have been tested and approved. P. Ensure that surface is clean and dry prior to installation. Ensure that insulation is dry before and during application. Finish with system at operating conditions. Q. Ensure that insulation is continuous through inside walls. Pack around ducts with fireproof self-supporting insulation material, properly sealed. R. Finish insulation neatly at hangers, supports and other protrusions. S. Locate insulation or cover seams in least visible locations. T. Repair separation of joints or cracking of insulation due to thermal movement or poor workmanship. U. Standing seams, supporting angles and flanges on insulated ductwork shall be insulated with thickness equal to the duct and edges shall be finished and vapor sealed. V. For supply or return ductwork which is required to be insulated, insulation shall be continuous and shall include the insulating of register, grille and diffuser connection plenums/boots. W. Mechanical fasteners shall not be riveted or screwed to the duct and shall not penetrate the metalwork. 3.3 FIELD INSPECTION A. Visually inspect to ensure that materials used conform to Specifications. Inspect installations progressively for compliance with requirements. DUCT INSULATION 230713 -15 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  TABLE I DUCTWORK INSULATION MATERIAL AND WALL THICKNESS DUCTWORK TYPE  INSULATION MATERIAL  VAPOR BARRIER REQUIRED  INSULATION WALL THICKNESS  Exhaust ductwork from exterior building openings (such as louvers and roof hoods) to 4 feet (1.2 m) interior of motorized damper or backdraft damper  Glass Fiber, Flexible (only if ductwork is concealed)  Yes  1 . inches (38.1 mm) (Minimum of R-6 installed)  Glass Fiber, Rigid  Yes  1inch (25.4 mm) (Minimum of R-6 installed)  Outside air intake ductwork  Glass Fiber, Flexible (only if ductwork is concealed)  Yes  2 layers of 1 . inch (38.1 mm) with staggered joints (Minimum of R-6 installed)  Glass Fiber, Rigid  Yes  2 layers of 1inch (25.4 mm) with staggered joints (Minimum of R-6 installed)  Mixed air ductwork  Glass Fiber, Flexible (only if ductwork is concealed)  Yes  2 layers of 1 . inches (38.1 mm) with staggered joints (Minimum of R-6 installed)  Glass Fiber, Rigid  Yes  2 layers of 1inch (25.4 mm) with staggered joints (Minimum of R-6 installed)  Supply ductwork for heating only systems with supply air temperatures less than 100 degrees F (37.7 degrees C)  Glass Fiber, Flexible  No  1 . inches (38.1 mm) (Minimum of R-6 installed)  Glass Fiber, Rigid  No  1inch (25.4 mm) (Minimum of R-6 installed)  Supply ductwork for heating and cooling systems with heating supply air temperatures less than 100 degrees F (37.7 degrees C)  Glass Fiber, Flexible  Yes  1 . inches (38.1 mm) (Minimum of R-6 installed)  Glass Fiber, Rigid  Yes  1inch (25.4 mm) (Minimum of R-6 installed)  Exposed supply ductwork for cooling systems that pass through non air-conditioned spaces  Glass Fiber, Rigid  Yes  1inch (25.4 mm) (Minimum of R-6 installed)  DUCT INSULATION 230713 -16 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  Transfer ducts  Glass Fiber Duct Liner, Rigid  -. 1inch (25.4 mm) (Minimum of R-6 installed)  Ductwork 10 feet upstream and downstream from a fan, or through the first elbow, whichever is longer (excluding fresh air intake ductwork and ductwork within 10 feet downstream of a cooling coil or humidifier)  Elastomeric Foam Duct Liner  -. 1inch (25.4 mm) (Minimum of R-6 installed)  Kitchen Hood Exhaust Duct  Fire Rated Blanket  Two layers of fire wrap providing a 2 hr fire resistive rating  DUCTWORK TYPE  INSULATION MATERIAL  VAPOR BARRIER REQUIRED  INSULATION WALL THICKNESS  Exterior Supply or Return Ductwork  Polyisocyanurate  Yes and Jacket Self-Adhesive Outdoor Jacket  Thickness to achieve R.12 installed or greater.  END OF SECTION 230713 DUCT INSULATION 230713 -17 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  SECTION 230719 HVAC PIPING INSULATION PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SECTION INCLUDES A. Piping insulation. B. Jackets and accessories. C. Shields, Inserts, and Saddles. 1.2 RELATED SECTIONS A. Division 07 Section “Penetration Firestopping.” B. Division 09 Section “Painting”: Painting insulation jacket. C. Division 23 Section “Identification for HVAC Piping and Equipment.” D. Division 23 Section “Hangers and Supports for HVAC Piping and Equipment”: Placement of hangers and hanger inserts. E. Division 23 Section “HVAC Equipment Insulation”: Removable, reusable insulation covers. 1.3 REFERENCES A. ASTM A167 -Standard Specification for Stainless and Heat-Resisting Chromium-Nickel Steel Plate, Sheet, and Strip. B. ASTM B209 -Standard Specification for Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Sheet and Plate (ASTM B209M -Standard Specification for Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Sheet and Plate). C. ASTM C177 -Standard Test Method for Steady-State Heat Flux Measurements and Thermal Transmission Properties by Means of the Guarded Hot Plate Apparatus. D. ASTM C195 -Standard Specification for Mineral Fiber Thermal Insulating Cement. E. ASTM C240 -Standard Test Methods of Testing Cellular Glass Insulation Block. F. ASTM C449/C449M -Standard Specification for Mineral Fiber Hydraulic-Setting Thermal Insulating and Finishing Cement. G. ASTM C518 -Standard Test Method for Steady-State Heat Flux Measurements and Thermal Transmission Properties by Means of the Heat Flow Meter Apparatus. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  H. ASTM C533 -Standard Specification for Calcium Silicate Block and Pipe Thermal Insulation. I. ASTM C534 -Standard Specification for Preformed Flexible Elastomeric Cellular Thermal Insulation in Sheet and Tubular Form. J. ASTM C547 -Standard Specification for Mineral Fiber Preformed Pipe Insulation. K. ASTM C552 -Standard Specification for Cellular Glass Thermal Insulation. L. ASTM C578 -Standard Specification for Preformed, Cellular Polystyrene Thermal Insulation. M. ASTM C591 -Standard Specification for Unfaced Preformed Rigid Cellular Polyurethane Thermal Insulation. N. ASTM C610 -Standard Specification for Expanded Perlite Block and Pipe Thermal Insulation. O. ASTM C795 -Standard Specification for Thermal Insulation for Use in Contact with Austenitic Stainless Steel. P. ASTM C1136 -Standard Specification for Flexible, Low Permeance Vapor Retarders for Thermal Insulation. Q. ASTM D1056 -Standard Specification for Flexible Cellular Materials -Sponge or Expanded Rubber. R. ASTM D1621 – Standard Test Method for Compressive Properties of Rigid Cellular Plastics. S. ASTM D1667 -Standard Specification for Flexible Cellular Materials-Vinyl Chloride Polymers and Copolymers (Closed-Cell Foam). T. ASTM D1784 -Standard Specification for Rigid Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Compounds and Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC) Compounds. U. ASTM D2842 -Standard Test Method for Water Absorption of Rigid Cellular Plastics. V. ASTM E84 -Standard Test Method for Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials. W. ASTM E96 -Standard Test Methods for Water Vapor Transmission of Materials. X. NAIMA National Insulation Standards. Y. NFPA 255 -Standard Method of Test of Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Z. Materials. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  AA. UL 723 -Standard for Test for Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials. 1.4 SUBMITTALS A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Submittal Procedures”. B. Product Data: Provide product description, thermal characteristics, list of materials and thickness for each service, and locations. 1.5 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Manufacturer Qualifications: Company specializing in manufacturing the Products specified in this Section with minimum 3 years’ experience. B. Applicator Qualifications: Company specializing in performing the work of this Section with minimum 3 years’ experience. 1.6 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS A. Conform to maximum flame spread/smoke developed rating of 25/50 in accordance with ASTM E84, NFPA 255 and UL 723. For elastomeric foam insulation, rating shall apply for thicknesses up to 2 inches (50 mm). B. Insulation materials and accessories shall be asbestos-free. No fibers with dimensions similar to asbestos fibers shall be released from any material. 1.7 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND PROTECTION A. Division 01 Section “Product Requirements”: Transport, handle, store, and protect products. B. Accept materials on site, labeled with manufacturer's identification, product density, and thickness. 1.8 ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS A. Division 01 Section “Product Requirements”: Environmental conditions affecting products on site. B. Maintain ambient conditions required by manufacturers of each product. C. Maintain temperature before, during, and after installation for minimum of 24 hours. 1.9 EXISTING PIPING A. Insulate existing piping as indicated on the Drawings. Contractor shall be responsible to field-verify quantities and sizes. Provide access to existing piping as required for complete insulation. Remove existing finishes and existing insulation as required. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 MANUFACTURERS A. Cellular Glass Products: 1. Pittsburgh Corning USA. Foamglas product line. 2. No substitutions. B. Elastomeric Foam Products: 1. Armacell LLC. 2. K-Flex USA. 3. No substitutions. C. Glass and Mineral Fiber Products: 1. Knauf Insulation. 2. Certainteed Corporation. 3. Johns Manville. 4. Owens Corning. 5. No substitutions. D. Accessories: 1. Ceel-Co division of Johns Manville (product: plastic jacket systems). 2. Foster Products, division of Specialty Construction Brands, Inc., a subsidiary of H.B. Fuller (mastics, sealants, reinforcing membranes, and accessories). 3. Johns Manville (products: Super-Seal acrylic polymer coatings, Zeston plastic jacket systems). 4. Pabco/Childers Metals, division of ITW Insulation Systems (products: metal jacket systems, and accessories). 5. Pittsburgh Corning (product: cellular glass insulation for high-density inserts). 6. Proto Corporation (product: plastic jacket systems). 7. Vac Systems International (product: Tough Coat acrylic polymer mechanical insulation repair coating). Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  2.2 CELLULAR GLASS A. Insulation: ASTM C552 and ASTM 1639; soda-lime silicate glass foam, noncombustible. Formed from sintered powdered glass and carbon black, heated in a “cellulation” process which creates carbon dioxide gas, which forms the bubbles and is permanently trapped in the cells. No “blowing agents” are used in its manufacturing. 1. 'K' (KSI) Value: ASTM C177 or ASTM C518, 0.29 at 75 ° F (0.042 at 24 ° C). 2. Maximum Service Temperature: 900 ° F (482 ° C). 3. Maximum Moisture Absorption: ASTM C240, 0.2 percent by volume. 4. Water Vapor Permeability: ASTM E96 Wet Cup Procedure B, 0.00 perm-in. (0.00 perm-cm). 5. Flexural Strength, Block: ASTM C203 or C240, 70 psi (480 kPa). 6. Density: 7.5 lb/cu ft (12024 kg/cu m). B. Accessories: 1. Coatings: Pittcote 300 Finish, and Pittcote 404 Coating. 2. Fabric: PC Fabric 79. 3. Sealant: Pittseal 444N, Pittseal CW, and RTV 450 Silicone Adhesive. 4. Adhesive: PC 88. 5. Jacketing: Pittwrap, Pittwrap SS, Pittwrap CW Plus, Pittwrap CW30, and Pittwrap IW 50. 2.3 ELASTOMERIC FOAM A. Products: 1. Armacell: AP Armaflex and AP Armaflex FS pipe and sheet insulation. 2. K-Flex USA: Insul-Tube and K-Flex LS pipe insulation, and Insul-Sheet S2S and K-Flex LS sheet insulation. 3. No substitutions. B. Insulation: ASTM C534; flexible, cellular elastomeric, molded or sheet. 1. 'K' ('Ksi') value: ASTM C177; 0.277 Btu-in/(hr-sq.ft-° F) at 75 ° F (0.04 W/m-K at 24 ° C). 2. Minimum service temperature: -70 ° F (-57 ° C) (flexible to -20 ° F (-29 ° C)). 3. Maximum service temperature: 220 ° F (104 ° C). 4. Maximum moisture absorption: ASTM C209, 0.2 percent by volume; or ASTM D1056, 5 percent by weight. 5. Moisture vapor transmission: ASTM E96; 0.08 perm-inches (0.116 ng/(s-m-Pa)). 6. Connection: Waterproof vapor barrier adhesive. C. White Insulation for Exposed Locations: Where exposed to the occupants’ view, provide insulation in white or off-white color, Armacell’s AP/Armaflex W or K-Flex USA’s Insul-Tube White and Insul-Sheet White. D. Elastomeric Foam Adhesive: Air dried, contact adhesive, compatible with insulation. E. Insulated Hanger Inserts: At Contractor’s option, Armacell Armafix IPH insulated pipe hanger inserts may be used at hanger locations. 1. Engineered from Armaflex insulation, with inserts of CFC-free PPUR/PIR polyurethane foam insulation bearing segments. 2. Outer shell of 30 mils (0.76 mm) -thick painted aluminum. 3. Self-adhesive closure strip. 4. Provide Armaflex insulation tape, wrapped around the IPH prior to placing in the hanger. 2.4 GLASS FIBER A. Insulation: ASTM C547; rigid molded, noncombustible. 1. 'K' ('Ksi') value: ASTM C177, 0.24 Btu-in/(hr-sq.ft-° F) at 75 ° F (0.035 W/m-K at 24 ° C). 2. Maximum service temperature: 850 ° F (454 ° C). 3. Maximum moisture absorption: 0.2 percent by volume. B. Vapor Barrier Jacket: 1. ASTM C1136, White kraft paper with glass fiber yarn, bonded to aluminized film. 2. Moisture vapor transmission: ASTM E96; 0.02 perm-inches. C. Tie Wire: 0.048 inch (1.22 mm) stainless steel with twisted ends on maximum 12 inch (300 mm) centers. D. Vapor Barrier Lap Adhesive: Compatible with insulation. E. Insulating Cement/Mastic: ASTM C195; hydraulic setting on mineral wool. F. Indoor Vapor Barrier Finish: 1. Cloth: Untreated; 9 oz/sq yd (305 g/sq m) weight. 2. Vinyl emulsion type acrylic, compatible with insulation, white color. G. Outdoor Vapor Barrier Mastic: Vinyl emulsion type acrylic or mastic, compatible with insulation, black color. H. Outdoor Breather Mastic: Vinyl emulsion type acrylic or mastic, compatible with insulation, black color. I. Insulating Cement: ASTM C449/C449M. 2.5 JACKETS A. PVC Plastic. 1. Jacket: ASTM D1784, One piece molded type fitting covers and sheet material, off-white color. a. Minimum service temperature: 0 ° F (-18 ° C). b. Maximum service temperature: 150 ° F (66 ° C). c. Moisture vapor transmission: ASTM E96; 0.002 perm-inches. d. Thickness: 15 mil (0.38 mm) for indoor use, 30 mil (0.76 mm) for outdoor use and in high-abuse areas such as corridors and locker rooms. e. Connections: Brush on welding adhesive, tacks (for heating systems only) or pressure sensitive color matching vinyl tape. 2. Covering Adhesive Mastic: Compatible with insulation. 2.6 SHIELDS, INSERTS, AND SADDLES A. Shields: 1. Carpenter and Paterson Figure 265GS, or equal. 2. Galvanized or electro-galvanized steel, minimum 12 inch length, minimum 120.degree arc, minimum 18 ga. 3. Provide contact adhesive to glue shields to the insulation. B. Snap-On Shields: 1. Cooper B-Line “Snap-N Shield”. 2. Snap-N Shield is an acceptable substitute for metal shields when installed with strut trapeze hangers on horizontal piping. 3. Paintable polypropylene plastic 12 inch long preformed shields, snap-on design for attachment to strut. 4. Gluing is not required with Snap-N Shield. 5. Provide black or white color to match the insulation in areas exposed to public view. C. Inserts: 1. Configuration: Minimum 6 inches (150 mm) long, of same thickness and contour as adjoining insulation; may be factory fabricated. 2. Insert Material: Hydrous calcium silicate insulation or other heavy density insulating material suitable for the planned temperature range. D. Saddles: 1. Factory fabricated of curved carbon steel plate, of same overall thickness and contour as adjoining insulation. Sides designed for welding to pipe. Center support plate for pipe sizes 12 inches (300 mm) and larger. 2.7 MANUFACTURER’S STAMP OR LABEL Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  A. Every package or standard container of insulation, jackets, cements, adhesives, and coatings delivered to the project site for use shall have the manufacturer’s stamp or label attached giving name of manufacturer, brand, and description of material. Insulation packages and containers shall be asbestos-free. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 EXAMINATION A. Verify that piping has been tested before applying insulation materials. B. Verify that surfaces are clean and dry, with foreign material removed. 3.2 INSTALLATION A. Division 01 Section “Quality Requirements”: Manufacturer's instructions. B.  Install in accordance with NAIMA National Insulation Standards where applicable.  C.  Provide insulation for surfaces of new piping and for surfaces of existing piping that are  uninsulated, as indicated and specified.  Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  D. Insulation values shall meet or exceed the requirements of ASHRAE 90.1-2010, applicable State Energy Codes, and Table I, whichever is greater. In addition, comply with the other requirements of this Section. 1. International Energy Conservation Code (IECC): Chapter 5 of the Code allows the use of ASHRAE 90.1 insulation thicknesses instead of the Minimum Pipe Insulation table which is in Chapter 5 of the IECC. This Specification does not reference the table in IECC. E. Piping systems requiring insulation, types of insulation required, and insulation thickness shall be as listed in Table I herein. For piping not listed in Table 1, insulate to meet Code requirements, using suitable specified materials, subject to Architect’s approval. Except for flexible unicellular insulation, insulation thicknesses as specified in Table I shall be one inch (25 mm) greater for insulated piping systems located outside the building and in unconditioned spaces. Unless otherwise specified, insulate fittings, flanges, and valves, except valve stems, hand wheels, and operators. Use factory pre-molded, precut, or field-fabricated insulation of the same thickness and conductivity as used on adjacent piping. Insulation exterior shall be factory cleanable, grease resistant, non-flaking, and non-peeling. F. Exposed Piping: Locate insulation and cover seams in least visible locations. G. Insulated Pipes Conveying Fluids Below Ambient Temperature: Insulate entire system including fittings, valves, unions, flanges, strainers, flexible connections, and expansion joints. H. Glass Fiber Insulated Pipes Conveying Fluids below Ambient Temperature: 1. Provide vapor barrier jackets, factory-applied or field-applied. Secure with self-sealing longitudinal laps and butt strips with pressure sensitive adhesive. Secure with outward clinch expanding staples and vapor barrier mastic. 2. Insulate fittings, joints, and valves with molded insulation of like material and thickness as adjacent pipe. Finish with glass cloth and vapor barrier adhesive or PVC fitting covers. I. For hot piping conveying fluids 140 ° F (60 ° C) or less, do not insulate flanges and unions at equipment, but bevel and seal ends of insulation. J. For hot piping conveying fluids over 140 ° F (60 ° C), insulate flanges and unions at equipment. K. Glass Fiber Insulated Pipes Conveying Fluids above Ambient Temperature: 1. Provide standard jackets, with or without vapor barrier, factory-applied or field-applied. Secure with self-sealing longitudinal laps and butt strips with pressure sensitive adhesive. Secure with outward clinch expanding staples. 2. Insulate fittings, joints, and valves with insulation of like material and thickness as Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  adjoining pipe. Finish with glass cloth and adhesive or PVC fitting covers. L. For piping which may operate at a range of temperatures (for example, heat recovery and heat exchange piping), provide insulation and vapor barriers as are suitable for the entire range of operation. M. Large Valve Bodies and Other Fittings: Large valves and other fittings requiring service access may be insulated with removable, reusable equipment covers with “Velcro” closures. Refer to Division 23 Section “HVAC Equipment Insulation.” N. Branches to Expansion Tanks: For hot water systems, insulate from the connection at the main to at least 10 feet (3 m) toward the tank. O. Branches to Gauges, Sensors, Drains, and Vents: Insulate branches to gauges, sensors, drains, and vents as for active sections of piping. For piping with operating temperatures above ambient, insulate to at least 6 inches (150 mm) from the active main. For temperature devices, insulate to include the sensing bulb or other element. For pressure devices in hot piping with syphon loops, insulate from the active main to the syphon loop, but it is not necessary to insulate the syphon loop or the portion of the branch on the device side of the syphon loop. P. Shields, Inserts, and Saddles: 1. Application: Provide shields at hangers. Provide inserts for piping 2 in. (50 mm) nominal size or larger. Provide saddles for piping 6 in. (150 mm) nominal size and larger and for generator exhaust piping and muffler. 2. Shield location: Between insulation jacket and hanger. 3. Insert location: Between support shield and piping and under the finish jacket. 4. Saddle location: Between support shield and piping. 5. Tack-weld saddles to the pipe or muffler. Fill air spaces within the saddle with insulation material. 6. Glue shields to outside of insulation after system is filled and run at operating temperature. 7. Align mid-length of shields, inserts, and saddles with the hanger centerline. Q. Continue insulation through walls, sleeves, pipe hangers, and other pipe penetrations. Finish at supports, protrusions, and interruptions. At fire separations, refer to Division 07. R. Pipe Exposed in Mechanical Equipment Rooms 10 feet (3 meters) or Less Above Finished Floor: 1. Piping: Finish with PVC or ABS jacket and fitting covers. S. Pipe Exposed in Finished Spaces 10 feet (3 meters) or Less Above Finished Floor: Finish with PVC or ABS jacket and fitting covers. 3.3 UNIFORM INSTALLATION A. Systems shall use a single insulation type throughout the installation. 3.4 PREPARATION A. Insulate piping after system tests have been completed and surfaces to be insulated have been cleaned of dirt, rust, and scale and dried. Ensure full range of motion of equipment actuators. Modify insulation to avoid obstruction of valve handles, safety reliefs, and other components requiring movement. Allow adequate space for pipe expansion. Install insulation with jackets drawn tight and cement down on longitudinal and end laps. Do not use scrap pieces where a full length section will fit. Insulation shall be continuous through sleeves, wall and ceiling openings. Extend surface finishes to protect surfaces, ends, and raw edges of insulation. Apply coatings and adhesives at the manufacturer’s recommended coverage per gallon. Individually insulate piping. Provide a moisture and vapor seal where insulation terminates against metal hangers, anchors and other projections through the insulation on surfaces for which a vapor seal is specified. Keep insulation dry during the application of any finish. Bevel and seal the edges of exposed insulation. Unless otherwise indicated, do not insulate the following: 1. Piping in radiation enclosures, or within cabinets of unit heaters. 2. Valve hand wheels. 3. Fire protection pipes. 4. Vibration isolating connections. 5. Adjacent insulation. 6. ASME stamps. 3.5 PIPING INSULATION A. Pipe Insulation (Except Elastomeric): Place sections of insulation around the pipe and joints tightly butted into place. The jacket laps shall be drawn tight and smooth. Secure jacket with fire resistant adhesive, factory applied self-sealing lap. Cover circumferential joints with butt strips, not less than 3-inches (76 mm) wide, of material identical to the jacket material. Overlap longitudinal laps of jacket material not less than 1-1/2 inches (38 mm). Adhesive used to secure the butt strip shall be the same as used to secure the jacket laps. When a vapor barrier jacket is required, as indicated in Table I, or on the ends of sections of insulation that butt against flanges, unions, valves, fittings, and joints, use a vapor-barrier coating conforming to manufacturer's weatherproof coating for outside service. Apply this vapor barrier coating at longitudinal and circumferential laps. Patch damaged jacket material by wrapping a strip of jacket material around the pipe and cementing, and coating as specified for butt strips. Extend the patch not less than l-l/2 inches (38 mm) past the break in both directions. At penetrations by pressure gauges and thermometers, fill the voids with the vapor barrier coating for outside service. Seal with a brush coat of the same coating. Where penetrating roofs, insulate piping to a point flush with the top of the flashing and seal with the vapor barrier coating. Butt tightly the exterior insulation to the top of the flashing and interior insulation. Extend the exterior metal jacket 2 inches (51 mm) down beyond the end of the insulation. Seal the flashing and counterflashing underneath with the vapor barrier coating. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  B. Elastomeric Foam Insulation: Bond cuts, butt joints, ends, and longitudinal joints with adhesive. Miter 90-degree turns and elbows, tees, and valve insulation. Where pipes penetrate fire walls, provide mineral-fiber insulation inserts and sheetmetal sleeves. Insulate flanges, unions, valves, and fittings in accordance with manufacturer’s published instructions. Apply two coats of vinyl lacquer finish to elastomeric foam insulation before applying PVC jacket in outside locations. C. Seal surfaces of fibrous insulation to prevent release of fibers. D. Sleeves and Wall Chases: Where penetrating interior walls, extend a metal jacket 2 inches (51 mm) out on either side of the wall and secure on each end with a band. Where penetrating floors, extend a metal jacket from a point below the back-up material to a point 10 inches (254 mm) above the floor with one band at the floor and one not more than one inch from end of metal jacket. Where penetrating exterior walls, extend the metal jackets through the sleeve to a point 2 inches (51 mm) beyond the interior surface of the wall. 3.6 FIELD INSPECTION A. Visually inspect to ensure that materials used conform to specifications. Inspect installations progressively for compliance with requirements. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  TABLE I PIPING INSULATION MATERIAL AND WALL THICKNESS SERVICE  INSULATION MATERIAL  VAPOR BARRIER REQUIRED  INSULATION WALL THICKNESS AT THE FOLLOWING PIPE DIAMETERS  <1 inch  1 inch to <1.5 inches  1.5 inches to <4 inches  4 inches to <8 inches  8 inches or Greater  Heating Systems (Hot Water Supply and Return)  Fluid Design Operating Temperature Range  141° F to 200 deg. F  Glass Fiber  No  1.5 inches  2 inches  2 inches  2 inches  2 inches  105° F to 140 deg. F  Glass Fiber  Yes  1.5 inches  2 inches  2 inches  2 inches  2 inches  Air Conditioning Condensate Drain Located Inside Building  Elastomeric Foam  N/A  0.75 inches  0.75 inches  1 inch  1.5 inches  1.5 inches  Glass Fiber  Yes  0.75 inches  0.75 inches  1 inch  1.5 inches  1.5 inches  Refrigerant Suction and Liquid Piping  Operating Temperature  40° F to 60 deg. F  Elastomeric Foam  N/A  0.75 inch  1 inch  1 inch  1.5 inches  2 inches  Below 40° F  Elastomeric Foam  N/A  1 inch  1 inch  1 inch  1.5 inches  2 inches  END OF SECTION 230719 HVAC PIPING INSULATION 230719 -13 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  SECTION 230900 INSTRUMENTATION AND CONTROL FOR MECHANICAL SYSTEMS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SECTION INCLUDES A. Direct Digital Control (DDC) equipment. B. Software. C. Installation. D. Controls Self-Commissioning. 1.2 PRODUCTS FURNISHED BUT NOT INSTALLED UNDER THIS SECTION A. Piping: 1. Control Valves – piping connections. 2. Temperature Sensor Wells and Sockets. 3. Pressure Sensors and Switches. 4. Flow Switches. 5. Flow Meters. B. Ductwork: 1. Access Doors. 2. Dampers -ductwork connections. 1.3 REFERENCES A. NEMA EMC1 -Energy Management Systems Definitions. B. NFPA 70 -National Electrical Code. C. NFPA 90A -Installation of Air Conditioning and Ventilation Systems. 1.4 SYSTEM DESCRIPTION A. Uninstall existing UV DDC controllers and space sensors and provide to owner for old stock. B. Integrate new Distech BACnet IP DDC FTR controls new equipment into exiting Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  Control Technologies SAU BMS. (Contact Chris Clorite cclorite@controltechinc.com). Contractor to include proper device licenses and maintenance agreements to the latest revision available at the time of owner training. Furnish Enterprise Supervisor software capable of 2 years history storage. Coordinate with owner for contractor provided PC or SAU provided server space. C. Submittals, data entry, electrical installation, programming, start up, test and validation, instruction of Owner's representative on maintenance and operation, as built documentation, and system warranty. 1.5 DEFINITIONS A. Note: The terms ATC, BAS, and DDC may be used interchangeably in this Section and on the Drawings, to indicate the overall control system. B. Definitions: 1. ATC: Automatic temperature control. 2. BACnet: A control network technology platform for designing and implementing interoperable control devices and networks. 3. BAS: Building Automation System. 4. DDC: Direct digital control. 5. I/O: Input/output. 6. MS/TP: Master slave/token passing. 7. PC: Personal computer. 8. PID: Proportional plus integral plus derivative. 1.6 SYSTEM PERFORMANCE A. Comply with the following performance requirements: 1. Graphic Display: Display graphic with minimum 20 dynamic points with current data within 10 seconds. 2. Graphic Refresh: Update graphic with minimum 20 dynamic points with current data within 8 seconds. 3. Object Command: Reaction time of less than two seconds between operator command of a binary object and device reaction. 4. Object Scan: Transmit change of state and change of analog values to control units or workstation within six seconds. 5. Alarm Response Time: Annunciate alarm at workstation within 45 seconds. 6. Program Execution Frequency: Run capability of applications as often as five seconds but selected consistent with mechanical process under control. 7. Performance: Programmable controllers shall execute DDC PID control loops, and scan and update process values and outputs at least once per second. 8. Reporting Accuracy and Stability of Control: Report values and maintain measured variables within tolerances as follows: a. Water Temperature: Plus or minus 1 deg F (0.5 deg C). b. Water Flow: Plus or minus 5 percent of full scale. c. Water Pressure: Plus or minus 2 percent of full scale. d. Space Temperature: Plus or minus 1 deg F (0.5 deg C). e. Ducted Air Temperature: Plus or minus 1 deg F (0.5 deg C). f. Outside Air Temperature: Plus or minus 2 deg F (1.0 deg C). g. Dew Point Temperature: Plus or minus 3 deg F (1.5 deg C). h. Temperature Differential: Plus or minus 0.25 deg F (0.15 deg C). i. Relative Humidity: Plus or minus 5 percent. j. Electrical: Plus or minus 5 percent of reading. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  1.7 SUBMITTALS A. Submit in accordance with Division 01 Section “Submittal Procedures.” B. Qualification Data: For Installer and manufacturer. C. Product Data: Include manufacturer's technical literature for each control device. Indicate dimensions, capacities, performance characteristics, electrical characteristics, finishes for materials, and installation and startup instructions for each type of product indicated. 1. Hardware: Bill of materials of equipment indicating quantity, manufacturer, and model number. Include technical data for control units, transducers/transmitters, sensors, actuators, valves, relays/switches, control panels, and operator interface equipment. 2. Controlled Systems: Instrumentation list with element name, type of device, manufacturer, model number, and product data. Include written description of sequence of operation including schematic diagram. D. Shop Drawings: Detail equipment assemblies and indicate dimensions, weights, loads, required clearances, method of field assembly, components, and location and size of each field connection. 1. Bill of materials of equipment indicating quantity, manufacturer, and model number. 2. Schematic flow diagrams showing fans, coils, dampers, valves, and control devices. 3. Wiring Diagrams: Power, signal, and control wiring. 4. Details of control panel faces, including controls, instruments, and labeling. 5. Written description of sequence of operation. 6. Schedule of dampers including size, leakage, and flow characteristics. 7. Schedule of valves including size and flow characteristics. 8. DDC System Hardware: a. Wiring diagrams for control units with termination numbers. b. Schematic diagrams and floor plans for field sensors and control hardware. c. Schematic diagrams for control, communication, and power wiring, showing trunk data conductors and wiring between operator workstation and control units. 9. Control System Software: List of color graphics indicating monitored systems, data (connected and calculated) point addresses, output schedule, and operator notations. 10. Controlled Systems: a. Schematic diagrams of each controlled system with control points labeled and control elements graphically shown, with wiring. b. Scaled drawings showing mounting, routing, and wiring of elements including bases and special construction. c. Written description of sequence of operation including schematic diagram. E. Data Communications Protocol Certificates: Certify that each proposed DDC system component complies with the open protocol standard ASHRAE Standard 135 (BACnet). F. Software and Firmware Operational Documentation: Include the following: 1. Software operating and upgrade manuals. 2. Program Software Backup: On a magnetic media or CD, complete with data files. 3. Device address list. 4. Printout of software application and graphic screens. G. Field quality-control test reports. H. Operation and Maintenance Data. 1.8 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE DATA A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Operation and Maintenance Data.” B. For mechanical instrumentation and control system to include in emergency, operation, and maintenance manuals. C. In addition to items specified in Division 01, include the following: 1. Maintenance instructions and lists of spare parts for each type of control device. 2. Exploded assembly views. 3. Interconnection wiring diagrams with identified and numbered system components and devices. 4. Inspection period, cleaning methods, cleaning materials recommended, and calibration tolerances. 5. Calibration records and list of set points. D. Manuals: Provide the following: 1. An Operator's Manual with graphic explanations of keyboard use for operator functions specified under Operator Training. 2. Computerized printouts of equipment controller’s data file construction including point processing assignments, physical terminal relationships, scales and offsets, command and alarm limits, and others as applicable. 3. A manual including revised as-built documents of materials required under the paragraph “SUBMITTALS” in this Specification Section. 4. Provide the quantity of manuals specified in Division 01, and at least 2 Operator’s Manuals and 2 As-Built Manuals to the Owner. Refer to other Sections of the Specifications for project requirements for quantities of documentation. 1.9 CODES AND APPROVALS A. The complete temperature control installation shall be in strict accordance to the Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  national and local electrical codes and the electrical Division of these Specifications. Devices designed for or used in line voltage applications shall be UL listed. Microprocessor based remote and central devices shall be UL916 Listed. B. Electronic equipment shall conform to the requirements of FCC regulation Part 15, Section 15 governing radio frequency electromagnetic interference and be labeled so. 1.10 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Installer Qualifications: Automatic control system manufacturer's authorized representative who is trained and approved for installation of system components required for this Project. B. Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, Article 100, by a testing agency acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction, and marked for intended use. C. Comply with ASHRAE Standard 135 (BACnet) for DDC system components. 1.11 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Deliver, store, protect and handle products to site under provisions of Division 01 Section “Project Requirements.” B. Factory-Mounted Components: Where control devices specified in this Section are indicated to be factory mounted on equipment, provide shipping of control devices to equipment manufacturer, in a timely manner coordinated with the equipment manufacturer. C. Components to be Installed under Other Sections: For components to be installed under other Sections of the Specifications, provide delivery of components to appropriate Subcontractors, provide installation instructions, and supervise their installation. 1.12 COORDINATION A. Coordinate location of thermostats and other exposed control sensors with Contract Drawings before installation. B. Coordinate equipment with Division 26 and existing fire alarm system to achieve compatibility with equipment that interfaces with that system. C. Coordinate line-voltage power supplies with Division 26. 1.13 WARRANTY A. Components, system software, parts, and assemblies furnished under this Section shall be guaranteed against defects in materials and workmanship for 1 year from acceptance date. B. Labor to troubleshoot, repair, reprogram, or replace system components shall be provided at no charge to the Owner during the warranty period. C. Corrective software modifications made during warranty service periods shall be updated on user documentation and on user and manufacturer archived software disks. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 ACCEPTABLE SUPPLIER A. Acceptable Manufacturer and Installer: 1. Control Technologies, New Hampshire Office, 111 Zachary Road, Manchester, NH 03109. 2. No Substitutions. B. The Temperature Control Contractor (or Subcontractor) shall hereinafter be referred to as the ATC Contractor. 2.2 SYSTEM REQUIREMENT A. Provide complete direct digital and electronic control system consisting of temperature sensors, thermostats, control valves, dampers, operators, indicating devices, interface equipment, and other apparatus required to operate mechanical system and to perform functions specified. Provide controls for the following: 1. Air conditioning systems. 2. Air moving and handling systems. 3. Control dampers and valves. 4. Cooling and heating coils. 5. Cooling and heating terminal units. 6. Exhaust, return, and supply fans. 7. Filter pressure drops. 8. Heat recovery systems. 9. Outside air and ventilation. 10. Temperature and humidity monitoring. 11. Hot water heating systems. 12. Fire alarm system interfaces. 13. Graphical workstation. 14. Variable frequency drives for pumps and fans. 15. Provide hardware and software required for remote monitoring of the ATC system through modem or ethernet interface. 2.3 SYSTEM COMMUNICATIONS A. Each workstation, building controller, and equipment controller communication interface shall utilize the BACnet™ protocol with an Ethernet (IEEE 802.3, 802.11), RS485 (EIA-485), or Zigbee® (802.15.4) physical interface and an appropriate data link technology as defined in ANSI®/ASHRAE® Standard 135-2012. (e.g., BACnet IP, BACnet IPv6, BACnet MS/TP, BACnet Zigbee). B. All system controllers shall be BTL listed as a BACnet Building Controller (B-BC) as defined in ANSI®/ASHRAE® Standard 135-2012. C. All documented status and control points, schedule, alarm, and data-log services or objects shall be available as standard object types as defined in ANSI®/ASHRAE® Standard 135-2012. D. Each System Controller shall communicate with a network of Custom Application and Application Specific Controllers utilizing one or more of the interfaces documented within Field Bus Communications below. E. For minimally managed IP networks, BACnet communication shall support BACnet Secure Connect (BACnet/SC), a secure and encrypted datalink layer specifically designed for those networks. 1. Field Bus Communications: a. BACnet™: 1) All equipment and plant controllers shall be BTL listed as a BACnet Application Specific Controller (B-ASC) or a BACnet Advanced Application Controller (B-AAC) as defined in ANSI®/ASHRAE® Standard 135-2012. 2) All communication shall conform to ANSI®/ASHRAE® Standard 135.2012. 3) System Controller shall function as a BACnet router to each unit controller providing a globally unique BACnet Device ID for all BACnet controllers within the system. b. BACnet Zigbee®: 1) Communication between System Controller and equipment/plant controllers shall utilize BACnet Zigbee as defined in ANSI®/ASHRAE® Standard 135-2012. 2) Each equipment controller wireless communication interface shall self-heal to maintain operation in the event of network communication failure. 3) Each zone sensor wireless communication interface shall be capable of many-to-one sensors per controller to support averaging, monitoring, and multiple zone applications. Sensing options shall include temperature, relative humidity, CO2, and occupancy. c. BACnet MS/TP: 1) Communication between System Controller and equipment/plant controllers shall utilize BACnet MS/TP as defined in ANSI®/ASHRAE® Standard 135-2012. 2.4 GENERAL A. ATC setpoints, reset schedules, time programs, historical trends shall be displayable at local ATC panels and on the system’s operator workstations. B. I/O Interface: Hardwired inputs and outputs may tie into system through controllers. Protect points so that shorting will cause no damage to controllers. 1. Binary Inputs: Allow monitoring of on-off signals without external power. 2. Pulse Accumulation Inputs: Accept up to 10 pulses per second. 3. Analog Inputs: Allow monitoring of low-voltage (0-to 10-V dc), current (4 to 20 mA), or resistance signals. 4. Binary Outputs: Provide on-off or pulsed low-voltage signal, selectable for normally open or normally closed operation with 3-position (on-off-auto) override switches and status lights. 5. Analog Outputs: Provide modulating signal, either low voltage (0-to 10-V dc) or current (4 to 20 mA). 6. Tri-State Outputs: Provide two coordinated binary outputs for control of 3-point, floating-type electronic actuators. 7. Universal I/Os: Provide software selectable binary or analog outputs. C. Power Supplies: Transformers with Class 2 current-limiting type or overcurrent protection; limit connected loads to 80 percent of rated capacity. DC power supply shall match output current and voltage requirements and be full-wave rectifier type with the following: 1. Output ripple of 5.0 mV maximum peak to peak. 2. Combined 1 percent line and load regulation with 100-microsecond response time for 50 percent load changes. 3. Built-in overvoltage and overcurrent protection and be able to withstand 150 percent overload for at least 3 seconds without failure. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  D. Power Line Filtering: Internal or external transient voltage and surge suppression for workstations or controllers with the following: 1. Minimum dielectric strength of 1000 V. 2. Maximum response time of 10 nanoseconds. 3. Minimum transverse-mode noise attenuation of 65 dB. 4. Minimum common-mode noise attenuation of 150 dB at 40 to 100 Hz. 2.5 SPARE POINTS A. Provide a minimum of 10 percent spare points or 16 spare points, whichever is greater, in each ATC control panel for future use. Spare points shall be equally distributed among analog input, analog output, digital input and digital output. It is not intended that spare points be provided in unitary control panels which serve VAV boxes, unit ventilators, fan coil units and heat pumps. It is intended that spare points be provided in master control panels and in panels which serve boiler/mechanical rooms and major equipment such as air handling units. 2.6 ACTUATORS A. Electric Motors: Size to operate with sufficient reserve power to provide smooth modulating action or 2-position action. 1. Comply with requirements in Division 23 Section “Common Motor Requirements for HVAC Equipment.” 2. Permanent Split-Capacitor or Shaded-Pole Type: Gear trains completely oil immersed and sealed. Equip spring-return motors with integral spiral-spring mechanism in housings designed for easy removal for service or adjustment of limit switches, auxiliary switches, or feedback potentiometer. B. Electronic Actuators: Direct-coupled type designed for minimum 60,000 full-stroke cycles at rated torque. 1. Manufacturers: a. Belimo. 2. Valves: Size for torque required for valve close-off at maximum pump differential pressure. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  a. Nonspring-Return Motors for Valves Larger Than NPS 2-1/2 (DN 65): Size for running torque of at least 150 lbf-in. (16.9 N-m) and breakaway torque of at least 300 lbf-in. (33.9 N-m). b. Spring-Return Motors for Valves Larger Than NPS 2-1/2 (DN 65): Size for running and breakaway torque of at least 150 lbf-in. (16.9 N-m). 3. Dampers: Size for running torque as recommended by the damper manufacturer for tight sealing under design operating static pressures and velocities. Submit damper manufacturer’s torque chart in same submittal as actuator selection table. a. For dampers which do not list torque values, provide torque calculated as follows: 1) Damper with Edge Seals: 7 inch-lb/sq. ft. (8.6 N-m/sq. m) of damper. 2) Damper without Edge Seals: 5 inch-lb/sq. ft. (6.22 N-m/sq. m) of damper. b. Nonspring-Return Motors for Dampers Larger Than 25 Sq. Ft (2.3 sq. m): Size for running torque of at least 150 lbf-in. (16.9 N-m) and breakaway torque of at least 300 lbf-in. (33.9 N-m). c. Spring-Return Motors for Dampers Larger Than 25 Sq. Ft (2.3 sq. m): Size for running and breakaway torque of at least 150 lbf-in. (16.9 N-m). d. Dampers with 2-to 3-Inch wg (500 to 750 Pa) of Pressure Drop or Face Velocities of 1000 to 2500 fpm (5 to 13 m/s): Increase running torque by a factor of 1.5. e. Dampers with 3-to 4-Inch wg (750 to 1000 Pa) of Pressure Drop or Face Velocities of 2500 to 3000 fpm (13 to 15 m/s): Increase running torque by a factor of 2.0. 4. Coupling: V-bolt and V-shaped, toothed cradle. 5. Overload Protection: Electronic overload or digital rotation-sensing circuitry. 6. Fail-Safe Operation: Mechanical, spring-return mechanism. Provide external, manual gear release on nonspring-return actuators. 7. Power Requirements (2-Position Spring Return): 24-V ac. 8. Power Requirements (Modulating): Maximum 10 VA at 24-V ac or 8 W at 24-V dc. 9. Proportional Signal: 2-to 10-V dc or 4 to 20 mA, and 2-to 10-V dc position feedback signal. 10. Temperature Rating: 40 to 104°F (5 to 40°C). a. In addition, valve actuators shall be suitable for the anticipated ambient temperature and fluid temperature. For example, actuators located within heating equipment terminal enclosures will experience higher temperatures. 11. Temperature Rating (Smoke Dampers): -22 to 250 degrees F (-30 to 121 degrees C). 12. Run Time: 30 seconds. 13. Actuator Housing: Molded or die-cast zinc or aluminum. Terminal unit actuators may be high-impact plastic with ambient temperature rating of 50 to 140 degrees F (10 to 60 degrees C) unless located in return-air plenums. 14. Damper actuators shall be provided with end switches. 2.7 CONTROL VALVES A. Control Valves: Factory fabricated, of type, body material, and pressure class based on maximum pressure and temperature rating of piping system, unless otherwise indicated. 1. Globe-type valves are required except for those applications where terminal-unit control valves or butterfly valves are specified or detailed. 2. Ball-type valves may be substituted for other types, and shall be manufactured by Belimo, with Belimo actuators (no substitutions). 3. Valves shall be suitable for water with up to 50 percent inhibited ethylene or propylene glycol. 4. 3-way valves shall be mixing pattern, except where diverting pattern is specified, or where manufacturer requires use of diverting pattern. 5. Rubber-paddle or ball-plug type control valves such as, but not limited to, Honeywell Fan-Coil Valves or the TAC Erie product line (division of Schneider Electric) are not allowed. 6. Valves with thermal-wax motors are not allowed. 7. Valves requiring cartridge replacement for service are not allowed. 8. Valves requiring special water treatment such as 50-micron filtration are not allowed. B. Sizing: Maximum pressure drop determined with valve full-open at design flow rate and the following: 1. 2 Position: Line size. 2. 2-Way Modulating: Between one-half and one times the variable-flow load pressure drop, but not to exceed 3 psig (21 kPa). 3. 3-Way Modulating: Between one-half and one times the variable-flow load pressure drop, but not to exceed 1.5 psig (10.5 kPa). 4. Note: For modulating valves, the load pressure drop is that across the modulated portion of the system. For example, for a 3-way valve providing reset-water control at a boiler, the modulated flow is across the boiler and accessories, whereas the building loop to terminal equipment is considered constant-flow for the purposes of this valve’s sizing. For a 3-way valve modulating the flow thru a coil, the coil and its pipe fittings comprise the variable-flow load. For a 3-way valve in a primary-secondary loop to a coil, where the flow thru the coil is a constant pumped flow, the variable load is in the primary-secondary bridge. C. Hydronic system globe valves shall have the following characteristics: 1. NPS 2 (DN 50) and Smaller: Class 125 bronze (or red brass) body, bronze or brass seat, bronze trim, rising stainless steel stem, renewable brass or composition disc or plug, screwed ends, with backseating capacity, repackable under pressure. Valve may have integral union ends. Valves with ends other than threaded or factory-integral unions are not allowed. 2. NPS 2-1/2 (DN 65) and Larger: Class 125 iron body, bronze trim, rising stem, plug-type disc, flanged ends, and renewable seat and disc. 3. Internal Construction: Replaceable plugs and stainless-steel or brass seats. a. Single-Seated Valves: Cage trim provides seating and guiding surfaces for plug on top and bottom. b. Double-Seated Valves: Balanced plug; cage trim provides seating and guiding surfaces for plugs on top and bottom. 4. Flow Characteristics: 2-way valves shall have equal percentage characteristics; 3-way valves shall have linear characteristics through 1 of the ports, equal percentage through the other. 5. Close-Off (Differential) Pressure Rating: Combination of actuator and trim shall provide minimum close-off pressure rating of 150 percent of total system (pump) head for 2-way valves, and 100 percent of pressure differential across valve or 100 percent of total system (pump) head for 3-way valves. 6. Temperature Rating: 250°F (121°C). D. Butterfly Valves: 200-psig (1380-kPa), 150-psig (1034-kPa) maximum pressure differential, ASTM A 126 cast-iron or ASTM A 536 ductile-iron body and bonnet, extended neck, stainless-steel stem, field-replaceable EPDM or Buna N sleeve and stem seals. 1. Body Style: Wafer or lug. 2. Disc Type: Nickel-plated ductile iron or aluminum bronze. 3. Seat: EPDM resilient seat replaceable. Disc may be coated, but primary sealing surface shall be the resilient seat mounted in the body. 4. Sizing: 1-psig (7-kPa) maximum pressure drop at design flow rate. 5. Temperature Rating: 250°F (121°C). E. Terminal Unit Control Valves: Bronze body, bronze trim, 2 or 3 ports as indicated, replaceable plugs and seats, and union and threaded ends. Valves with ends other than threaded or factory-integral unions are not allowed. 1. Applications: Duct-mounted reheat coils, VAV-box reheat coils, unit heaters, cabinet unit heaters, radiant ceiling heating panels, and fintube radiation. For other applications, see globe valve specifications above. 2. Honeywell “small linear control valves” with “linear valve actuators” (or equal) may be used only for VAV box coils and hot water duct coils; they may not be used for other coil or equipment types. 3. Rating: Class 125 for service at 125 psig (860 kPa) and 250 deg F (121 deg C) operating conditions. 4. Close-Off (Differential) Pressure Rating: Combination of actuator and trim shall provide minimum close-off pressure rating sufficient to close against pump shutoff head. 5. Flow Characteristics: 2-way valves shall have equal percentage characteristics; 3-way valves shall have linear characteristics. 2.8 ELECTRONIC SENSORS A. Description: Vibration and corrosion resistant; for wall, immersion, or duct mounting as required. B. Thermistor Temperature Sensors and Transmitters: 1. Accuracy: Plus or minus 0.5°F (0.3°C) at calibration point. 2. Wire: Twisted, shielded-pair cable. 3. Insertion Elements in Ducts: Single point, 8 inches (200 mm) long; use where Bid Pack No2 not affected by temperature stratification or where ducts are smaller than 9 sq. ft. (0.84 sq. m). 4. Averaging Elements in Ducts: 36 inches (915 mm) long, flexible; use where prone to temperature stratification or where ducts are larger than 10 sq. ft. (1 sq. m). 5. Insertion Elements for Liquids: Brass or stainless-steel socket with minimum insertion length of 2-1/2 inches (64-mm). 6. Room Sensor Cover Construction: See below. 7. Outside-Air Sensors: Watertight inlet fitting, shielded from direct sunlight. 8. Room Security Sensors: Stainless-steel cover plate with insulated back and security screws. C. Humidity Sensors: Bulk polymer sensing element. 1. Accuracy: 2 percent full range with linear output. 2. Room Sensor Range: 20 to 80 percent relative humidity. 3. Room Sensor Cover Construction: See below. D. Pressure Transmitters/Transducers: 1. Static-Pressure Transmitter: Nondirectional sensor with suitable range for expected input, and temperature compensated. a. Accuracy: 2 percent of full scale with repeatability of 0.5 percent. b. Output: 4 to 20 mA. c. Duct Static-Pressure Range: 0-to 5-inch wg (0 to 1240-Pa). 2. Water Differential-Pressure Transducers: Stainless-steel diaphragm construction, suitable for service; minimum 150-psig (1034-kPa) operating pressure and tested to 300-psig (2070-kPa); linear output 4 to 20 mA. 3. Differential-Pressure Switch (Air or Water): Snap acting, with pilot-duty rating and with suitable scale range and differential. E. Room Sensor Cover Construction: Manufacturer's standard locking covers. 1. Set-Point Adjustment: Concealed. 2. Set-Point Indication: Concealed. 3. Thermometer: Concealed. 4. Override Pushbutton: For timed override of occupied/unoccupied cycle. Provide in normally-occupied rooms such as classrooms, shops, offices, cafeterias, kitchen, lecture hall, band and chorus rooms, and gymnasiums. Do not provide in storage rooms, stairs, entries, vestibules, corridors, elevator machine rooms, electrical rooms, data rooms, and mechanical rooms. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  F. Room sensor accessories include the following: 1. Insulating Bases: For sensors located on exterior walls. 2. Guards: Lockable, vented clear plastic guard with opaque solid wall plate, equivalent to Kele TG500 Series. 3. Wall Mounting Box: Recessed, steel, securely fastened to wall framing. Equal to Steel City metallic switch boxes by Thomas & Betts Corp. Box may only be omitted where sensor attaches directly to masonry construction. 2.9 THERMOSTATS AND TEMPERATURE SENSORS A. Thermostats and Sensors in locations in regular view by the occupants shall have covers which are simple, aesthetically pleasing, neutral in color, with manufacturer’s logo, if any, in black or neutral color, and shall fit flush to the surrounding wall surface. B. Freezestats: 1. Freezestat safety low limits shall be duct-mounted manual-reset and automatic-reset (see control sequences) 20-foot limited fill capillary-tube type, responsive to the coolest section of its length. 2. Air handling systems which handle outside air (or a mix of outside air and return air) or are located outdoors shall have freezestats at hydronic and steam coils. Where freezestats are required, provide both a manual-reset type set near freezing temperature for shutdown, and an automatic-reset type set at a warmer temperature for preventive action unless otherwise specifically indicated not to have both. C. Thermostats: 1. Electric thermostats shall be line voltage or low voltage type, suitable for the application. They shall have exposed setpoint adjustment and setpoint indicator. Electric thermostats shall be provided with manual adjustment dials and shall be protected by lockable tamper proof covers. 2. Unit heater aquastats shall be strap-on type. D. Temperature Sensors: 1. Temperature sensors shall provide a 2-wire connection to the controller that is polarity and wire type insensitive. Sensors shall have communications jacks for connection to the communication trunk to which the controller is connected. The temperature sensor, the connected controller, and other devices on the communications bus shall be accessible by the Graphical Programming tool. 2. Provide with override buttons which, when depressed during unoccupied time periods, will override the zone’s temperature controls and setpoints to occupied conditions for a user adjustable period of time (initially set for 2 hours). Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  E. Tamper-Resistant Covers and Guards: 1. Provide protective lockable guards for thermostats and temperature sensors located in high traffic and unsecure areas. These areas shall include, but not be limited to: a. Cafeteria. b. Corridors. c. Lobbies. d. Locker Rooms. e. Toilet Rooms. f. Stairways. g. Storage Areas. h. Vestibules. 2. Provide tamper-resistant blank covers (without manual adjustments, temperature indicators, or override buttons) for thermostats and temperature sensors located in the following areas: a. Closets. b. Corridors. c. Locker Rooms. d. Stairways. e. Storage Areas. f. Toilet Rooms. g. Vestibules. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  3. Provide tamper-resistant semi-blank covers (without manual adjustments or temperature indicators, but including override buttons) for thermostats and temperature sensors located in the following areas: a. Lobbies. 2.10 STATUS SENSORS A. Where differential pressure “sensor” is indicated or specified, they shall be analog-output type as specified herein. Where differential pressure “switch” is indicated, it may be digital-output type. B. Status Inputs for Fans: Unless otherwise specified: Differential-pressure switch with pilot-duty rating and with adjustable range of 0-to 5-inch wg (0 to 1240 Pa). C. Status Inputs for Pumps: Unless otherwise specified: Differential-pressure switch with pilot-duty rating and with adjustable pressure-differential range of 8 to 60 psig (55 to 414 kPa), piped across pump. D. Status Inputs for Electric Motors: Comply with ISA 50.00.01, current-sensing fixed-or split-core transformers with self-powered transmitter, adjustable and suitable for 175 percent of rated motor current. E. Voltage Transmitter (100-to 600-V ac): Comply with ISA 50.00.01, single-loop, self-powered transmitter, adjustable, with suitable range and 1 percent full-scale accuracy. F. Power Monitor: 3-phase type with disconnect/shorting switch assembly, listed voltage and current transformers, with pulse kilowatt hour output and 4-20 mA kW output, with maximum 2 percent error at 1.0 power factor and 2.5 percent error at 0.5 power factor. G. Current Switches: Self-powered, solid-state with adjustable trip current, selected to match current and system output requirements. H. Electronic Valve/Damper Position Indicator: Visual scale indicating percent of travel and 2-to 10-V dc, feedback signal. I. Water-Flow Switches: Bellows-actuated mercury or snap-acting type with pilot-duty rating, stainless-steel or bronze paddle, with appropriate range and differential adjustment, in NEMA 250, Type 1 enclosure. 2.11 CURRENT TRANSFORMERS A. Current transformers (CTs) are not an acceptable substitute for pump or fan monitoring where flow switches or pressure switches are specified. B. Provide CTs as required for the sequences of operation specified. 2.12 EXAMINATION A. Verify that power supply and data outlet is available to control units and operator workstation. 2.13 ELECTRICAL WIRING AND CONNECTION INSTALLATION A. Wiring and conduits shall be properly supported and run in a neat and workmanlike manner. Wiring and conduits exposed and in equipment rooms shall run parallel to or at right angles to the building structure. Wiring and conduits within enclosures shall be neatly bundled and anchored to prevent obstruction to devices and terminals. Wiring, conduits, wall boxes, and accessories shall conform to Division 26 – Electrical. B. The ATC Contractor shall be responsible for electrical installation, including any low voltage and line voltage wiring which is required for a fully functional control system and not indicated on the Electrical Drawings or required by the Electrical Specifications. C. Wiring shall be in accordance with local and national Codes and regulations. D. Provide electrical materials and installation under this Section. Requirements and standards shall be as specified in other Sections and Divisions of the Specifications, as indicated in paragraphs below. 1. Install raceways, boxes, and cabinets in conformance to Division 26. 2. Install building wire and cable in conformance to Division 26. 3. Provide interface wiring (line and low voltage) as required to complete ATC system installation. a. Conceal cable, except in mechanical rooms and areas where other conduit and piping are exposed. b. Install exposed cable in raceway. c. Install concealed cable in raceway. d. Bundle and harness multi-conductor instrument cable in place of single cables where several cables follow a common path. e. Fasten flexible conductors, bridging cabinets and doors, along hinge side; protect against abrasion. Tie and support conductors. f. Number-code or color-code conductors for future identification and service of control system, except local individual room control cables. g. Install wire and cable with sufficient slack and flexible connections to allow for vibration of piping and equipment. E. Control wiring in boiler room, mechanical rooms, and equipment rooms shall be installed in conduit which shall comply with the requirements of the Electrical Specifications. F. Electronic low-voltage wiring shall be #18 AWG minimum THHN and shielded if required. G. Provide power for normally-open fintube, baseboard hot water valves from a central source(s). Interlock with hot water pump(s) to de-energize valves when pump is de.energized. 2.14 INSTALLATION A. Wall mounted thermostats and temperature sensors shall be attached to an electrical wall box attached to a wall stud, masonry wall, or to blocking. Attaching to gypsum wallboard only shall not be allowed. B. Mounting heights of room sensors, thermostats, and other devices, which have features which occupants may adjust or set by touching, shall be installed in locations and heights conforming to U.S. Department of Justice – 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design. 1. Unobstructed Forward or Side Reach: Reaches, measured by distance above the finished floor or ground surface upon which the occupant shall be sitting or standing, shall be a high of 48 inches (1220 mm) maximum measured to the top of the device, and a low of 15 inches (380 mm) minimum measured to the bottom of the device. 2. Obstructed High Reach: Where a high forward reach is over an obstruction, the clear floor space shall extend beneath the element for a distance not less than the required reach depth over the obstruction. The high forward reach shall be 48 inches (1220 mm) maximum where the reach depth is 20 inches (510 mm) maximum. Where the reach depth exceeds 20 inches (510 mm), the high forward reach shall be 44 inches (1120 mm) maximum and the reach depth shall be 25 inches (635 mm) maximum. 3. Coordinate with Division 26 – Electrical to match heights for an aesthetically pleasing appearance. C. Verify location of room temperature sensors and other exposed control sensors with Drawings and room details before installation. 1. Thermostats and temperature sensors are indicated on the Drawings for general location. Terminal heat transfer units and fans which control space temperature shall be provided with thermostatic control, whether or not a thermostat or temperature sensor has been indicated on the Drawings. 2. Locate in the general location indicated, and coordinate to group together with room light switches and other devices of similar height, to minimize disruption of open wall space. 3. Locate to not be above electrical dimmers. 4. Locate to avoid heat-generating equipment such as computers, copiers, cooking equipment, coffee makers, vending machines, and refrigerators. Where electrical outlets are indicated near sensors, verify whether equipment is intended. 5. Locate to avoid heating piping which may be concealed in partitions. 6. Locate away from windows and exterior doors. 7. Locate to avoid other false sources of heat such as strong sunlight. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  D. Provide guards on room sensors and thermostats in the following locations: 1. Public areas other than classrooms and offices, including but not limited to: Corridors, hallways, entrances, lobbies, vestibules, stairwells, toilet rooms, locker rooms, storage rooms, cafeterias, and gymnasiums. 2. Locations vulnerable to traffic. 3. Where indicated. E. Install averaging elements in ducts and plenums in crossing or zigzag pattern. F. Install freezestats serpentined across and clipped to the downstream face of coils. Entire length of capillary tube shall be within the unit airstream. G. Perform adjustment/relocation of freezestats as required to eliminate nuisance freezestat alarms. H. Aquastats installed on unit heaters and at any location above 60 inches (1525 mm) above finished floor shall be installed with adjustment knobs facing downward to facilitate adjustment. I. Outdoor air temperature sensor(s) shall be installed on the North side of the building. J. Connect manual-reset limit controls independent of manual-control switch positions. Automatic duct heater resets may be connected in interlock circuit of power controllers. K. Connect hand-off-auto selector switches to override automatic interlock controls when switch is in hand position. L. Connect lead-lag controls to lock out the failed or non-selected motor, to prevent simultaneous operation. M. Connect lead-lag controls so that only 1 motor can run in starter “hand” position. N. Connect fire alarm shutdown of motors on the load side of controls and hand-off-auto switches, to prevent motor from running in any switch position during fire alarm. O. For components to be installed under other Sections of the Specifications, provide delivery of components to appropriate Subcontractors, provide installation instructions, and supervise their installation. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  P. Install hydronic instrument wells, valves, and other accessories according to Division 23 Section “Hydronic Piping.” 1. Sensors shall be immersion type in wells unless otherwise specified or indicated. 2. Enlarge piping at wells to prevent excess interference with flow. 3. Locate wells to ensure insertion in active flowing section of piping or tank. 4. Fill sensor wells with thermal heat transfer paste to ensure good conduction. Q. Install automatic dampers in conformance to Division 23 Section “Air Duct Accessories.” R. Install damper motors on outside of duct in warm areas, not in locations exposed to outdoor temperatures. Provide stand-off brackets of depth to meet or exceed specified thickness of duct insulation. S. Install duct volume-control dampers according to Division 23 Sections specifying air ducts. T. Provide labels and nameplates to identify control components according to Division 23 Section “Identification for HVAC Piping and Equipment.” U. Unless otherwise indicated, actuators shall be spring loaded and shall, upon a loss of power, actuate their device to an appropriate “fail safe” position. 1. Hot water valves -fail safe to fully open. 2. Outside and exhaust air dampers -fail safe to fully closed. 3. Exhaust fan motorized dampers -fail safe to fully closed. 4. Supply air dampers at rooftop units -fail safe to fully closed. 5. Return air dampers -fail safe to fully open. 6. Combination fire/smoke dampers -fail safe to fully closed. V. For actuators that are required to “fail safe”, provide spring return actuators. “Floating point” actuators shall not be allowed for these applications. “Floating point” actuators shall be allowed for actuators that are not required to “fail safe”. W. Enter computer programs and data files into the related computers including control programs, initial approved parameters and settings, and English descriptors. X. Maintain digital copies of data file and application software for reload use in the event of a system crash or memory failure. 1 copy shall be delivered to the Owner during training session, and 1 copy shall be archived in the ATC Contractor's local software vault. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  Y. Install software in control units and operator workstation(s). Implement features of programs to specified requirements and as appropriate to sequence of operation. Z. Connect and configure equipment and software to achieve sequence of operation specified. 2.15 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Coordinate with the requirements of Division 01 Section “General Commissioning Requirements”. B. Manufacturer's Field Service: Engage a factory-authorized service representative to inspect field-assembled components and equipment installation, including connections, and to assist in field testing. Report results in writing. C. Perform the following field tests and inspections and prepare test reports: 1. Operational Test: After electrical circuitry has been energized, start units to confirm proper unit operation. Remove and replace malfunctioning units and retest. 2. Test and adjust controls and safeties. D. DDC Verification: 1. Verify that instruments are installed before calibration, testing, and loop or leak checks. 2. Check instruments for proper location and accessibility. 3. Check instrument installation for direction of flow, elevation, orientation, insertion depth, and other applicable considerations. 4. Check flow instruments. Inspect tag number and line and bore size, and verify that inlet side is identified and that meters are installed correctly. 5. Check pressure instruments, piping slope, installation of valve manifold, and self-contained pressure regulators. 6. Check temperature instruments and material and length of sensing elements. 7. Check control valves. Verify that they are in correct direction. 8. Check DDC system as follows: a. Verify that DDC controller power supply is from emergency power supply, if applicable. b. Verify that wires at control panels are tagged with their service designation and approved tagging system. c. Verify that spare I/O capacity has been provided. d. Verify that DDC controllers are protected from power supply surges. E. Replace damaged or malfunctioning controls and equipment and repeat testing procedures. 2.16 ADJUSTING A. Calibrating and Adjusting: 1. Calibrate instruments. 2. Make 3-point calibration test for both linearity and accuracy for each analog instrument. 3. Calibrate equipment and procedures using manufacturer's written recommendations and instruction manuals. Use test equipment with accuracy at least double that of instrument being calibrated. 4. Control System Inputs and Outputs: a. Check analog inputs at 0, 50, and 100 percent of span. b. Check analog outputs using milliampere meter at 0, 50, and 100 percent output. c. Check digital inputs using jumper wire. d. Check digital outputs using ohmmeter to test for contact making or breaking. e. Check resistance temperature inputs at 0, 50, and 100 percent of span using a precision-resistant source. 5. Flow: a. Set differential pressure flow transmitters for 0 and 100 percent values with 3-point calibration accomplished at 50, 90, and 100 percent of span. b. Manually operate flow switches to verify that they make or break contact. 6. Pressure: a. Calibrate pressure transmitters at 0, 50, and 100 percent of span. b. Calibrate pressure switches to make or break contacts, with adjustable differential set at minimum. 7. Temperature: a. Calibrate resistance temperature transmitters at 0, 50, and 100 percent of span using a precision-resistance source. b. Calibrate temperature switches to make or break contacts. 8. Stroke and adjust control valves and dampers without positioners, following the manufacturer's recommended procedure, so that valve or damper is 100 percent open and closed. 9. Stroke and adjust control valves and dampers with positioners, following manufacturer's recommended procedure, so that valve and damper is 0, 50, and 100 percent closed. 10. Provide diagnostic and test instruments for calibration and adjustment of system. 11. Provide written description of procedures and equipment for calibrating each type of instrument. Submit procedures review and approval before initiating startup procedures. B. Adjust initial temperature set points. C. Occupancy Adjustments: When requested within 12 months of date of Substantial Completion, provide on-site assistance in adjusting system to suit actual occupied conditions. Provide up to 3 visits to Project during other than normal occupancy hours for this purpose. 2.17 VALIDATION A. The ATC Contractor shall completely check out, calibrate, and test connected hardware and software to insure that the system performs in accordance with the approved submittals for specifications and sequences of operations. B. Witnessed Validation Demonstration: Shall consist of: 1. Display and demonstrate each type of data entry to show site specific customizing capability. 2. Execute digital and analog commands. 3. Demonstrate ATC loop precision and stability via trend logs of inputs and outputs. 4. Demonstrate energy management performance via trend logs and command trace. 2.18 DEMONSTRATION A. Engage a factory-authorized service representative to train Owner's maintenance Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  personnel to adjust, operate, and maintain Mechanical instrumentation and controls. Refer to Division 01 Section “Demonstration and Training.” 2.19 TRAINING A. Training shall be by the ATC Subcontractor and shall utilize specified manuals and as-built documentation. Video record each training session, and turn the completed video over to the Owner when training has been completed. B. Operator training shall include 4 four-hour sessions encompassing: 1. Modifying text. 2. Sequence of Operation review. 3. Selection of displays and reports. 4. Use of the specified functions. 5. Setting and adjusting of occupancy schedules. 6. Troubleshooting of sensors. 7. Owner questions/concerns. C. 2 training sessions shall be conducted at project substantial completion, and the others shall be conducted at the Owner’s request and in accordance with the Owner’s schedule within a period of 6 months after substantial completion of the project. D. At 6 months after substantial completion, unused training hours shall be, at the Owner’s discretion, used for future training of new personnel or reimbursed to the Owner at the Subcontractor’s current hourly service rate. 2.20 SELF COMMISSIONING A. Provide validation of the temperature control system as follows: 1. Completely check out, calibrate, and test connected hardware and software to insure that the system performs in accordance with the approved products and sequences of operations submitted. 2. Witnessed validation demonstration shall consist of: a. Display and demonstrate each type of data entry to show site specific customizing capability. b. Execute digital and analog commands. c. Demonstrate DDC loop precision and stability via trend logs of inputs and outputs. Barnstead School District, SAU 86 May 20, 2025 Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations TTG Proj No. 5199 Bid Pack No2 d. Demonstrate trend logs and command trace. PART 3 -SEQUENCE OF OPERATION 3.1 GENERAL A. Setpoints shall be adjustable by the building operator through the graphic interface on the operator’s workstation desktop PC, and through a portable laptop computer plugged into the system at locations throughout the building. B. Provide the ability for the Commissioning Agent and the Testing and Balancing Agent to connect to the system and change setpoints, to temporarily override setpoints, and to override modes of operation, as may be required for their work. 3.2 ALARMS A. In addition to alarms specified in the following sequences, provide alarms as follows. Program alarms selected by the Owner to initiate a signal to the Owner’s off-site building security company, and to designated agents such as company employees. 1. Room low temperature alarm. 2. Room high temperature alarm. 3. Boiler failure alarm. 4. Pump failure alarm (both pumps in lead-lag situations). 3.3 OCCUPIED/UNOCCUPIED MODE A. Provide as a minimum the following zones of occupied/unoccupied control, each with its own time-of-day and calendar sequences: 1. Administration Areas 2. Classrooms 3. Auditorium 4. Cafeteria/Kitchen 5. Gymnasium/Locker Rooms/Team Rooms 6. Library/media room B. When occupied/unoccupied override buttons on space sensors are pressed, the mode for that space and associated toilet rooms shall change to occupied mode for 2 hours (adjustable). System shall maintain a log of where and when the buttons are pressed during unoccupied times, but shall not log if button is pressed during occupied time. C. Operator Station Display: At a minimum, indicate the following on operator workstation display terminal: 1. Identification of room where button was pressed. 2. Identification of systems in override status. 3. Override time remaining. 3.4 HEATING/COOLING MODE A. Heating Mode: 1. Heating mode is automatically enabled when outside air temperature drops below setpoint (60°F, adjustable) or when there is a call for heating from any 2 (quantity adjustable) zones or more, or from the low-temperature alarm in any space. Heating mode is automatically disabled when the outside air temperature rises above setpoint. 2. Heating control valves are powered from dedicated circuits. When the hot water pumps are disabled, control power to the valves is de-energized, allowing the valves to go to failsafe position. This is to prolong actuator life by turning them off in warm weather. B. Cooling Mode: 1. Cooling mode is automatically enabled when outside air temperature rises above setpoint (10°F, adjustable) or when there is a call for cooling from the room sensor or the high-temperature alarm in any space. Cooling mode is automatically disabled when the outside air temperature drops below setpoint, if no space is calling for mechanical cooling. 2. Cooling mode is enabled by the DDC system when there is a call for mechanical cooling. Economizer cooling is the first stage of cooling. For systems which have economizer cooling, mechanical cooling is locked out when outside air temperature is below 45°F (adjustable). C. Deadband (Zero-Energy Mode): In spaces and systems with both heating and cooling setpoints, there shall be a difference of at least 4°F between temperature setpoints, unless otherwise specified. When the sensed temperature or humidity is between the heating and cooling setpoints, the system shall operate with no heating hot water or cooling except as required to maintain the status quo. D. Provide manual override points on the graphics screen to allow the Owner to override the automatic heating and cooling modes. 3.5 HEATING SUPPLY WATER TEMPERATURE CONTROL A. Hot water boilers are operated independently of any other system controls. 1. Boilers: Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  a. The boilers are enabled on based on system demand. When only 1 boiler is needed to meet the demand, the other boiler is de-energized and its return valve closes. b. Boiler runtime is monitored, and alternation is varied to equalize runtime. A boiler which is enabled is not disabled for the sole purpose of equalizing runtime, but once it has been disabled due to lack of demand, its runtime is compared to the others to determine the order of alternation. c. When a boiler is energized, its gas burner fires (fully modulating) to maintain setpoint. d. The boiler setpoint is reset based on outdoor air temperature, in a supply temperature range of 100 to 160°F (adjustable) over an outdoor range of -10 to 50°F. e. When the boilers are swapping from lead to lag, the lag boiler is brought up to the current temperature of the lead boiler before swapping. f. When the boiler is operational its associated boiler pump shall be indexed on and shall be operating. g. The ATC monitors boiler safeties including low water cutoff and flame failure. B. Loop Temperature Control: 1. The heating water supply setpoint is reset based on outdoor air temperature, in a supply temperature range of 100 to 160°F over an outdoor range of -10 to 50°F. 2. The boiler pumps supplied with the boilers shall operate when the boilers are firing. C. The following points and associated control wiring are provided under this Section. Coordinate with boiler controller manufacturer. Provide control wiring required for interface between automatic temperature control system and boiler controllers. Coordinate control signal with boiler controller manufacturer. 1. Analog input to receive signal from lead/lag controller for calculated system target temperature. Use this signal for control of lead boiler burner. 2. Analog input to receive signal from lead/lag controller for boiler temperature (each boiler). 3. Digital input to receive signal from lead/lag controller for burner command status (on/off). 4. Digital input to receive signal from lead/lag controller for burner status (on/off /alarm). 5. Digital input to receive signal from lead/lag controller for lag boiler status. 6. Digital output to lead/lag controller to enable/disable boiler system. D. Operator Station Display: At a minimum, indicate the following on operator workstation display terminal: 1. Boilers: a. Boiler lead/lag status for each boiler. b. Boiler on/off command status. c. Boiler water temperature. d. Boiler water temperature setpoint. e. Loop water supply and return temperatures. f. Loop water supply temperature setpoint. g. Boiler and loop reset schedule. h. Outdoor temperature. 3.6 HOT WATER CIRCULATING PUMPS: A. Pumps are started and stopped through the DDC system. The lead pump runs continuously in heating mode. B. The variable frequency drive modulates pump speed to maintain system differential pressures. 1. Provide differential pressure sensors at remote locations at least 3/4 of the total system distance from the pumps, and where indicated, including one set for each phased area as required. 2. Differential pressure setpoints are determined by the Testing and Balancing (TAB) Agent and are the value at which design water flow is achieved at each sensor. 3. The system has the capability to operate on a single sensor selected by the operator. It is also able to operate on 2 or more sensors selected by the operator, responding to the sensor which has the greatest deviation from setpoint. 4. When the differential pressure sensor(s) call for increased pressure, the variable frequency drive for the lead pump modulates the pump motor speed from minimum to maximum to maintain the differential pressure setpoint. 5. The ATC system monitors VFD status, and other data. If a VFD indicates trouble, an alarm is generated. If the lead-pump VFD indicates trouble, the lead pump and its VFD are locked out and the lag pump is energized. C. An automatic lead-lag controller alternates lead pump operation on a weekly basis. The operator workstation also provides a manual selection of the lead pump. If the lead pump fails, that pump is locked out in both “Hand” and “Auto” modes (manual reset), the lag pump is automatically energized, and an alarm is generated at the operator workstation. If the lag pump also fails, a critical alarm is generated at the operator workstation, and an audible and visual alarm with silencing button is energized in the Mechanical Room. D. Differential pressure sensors at each pump monitor pump operation and generate an alarm if differential pressure falls below minimum set point, with time delay on start-up and lead pump switch-over. If the lead pump fails for 15 seconds or more on initial startup, the lead pump is locked out in both Hand and Auto positions, the lag pump starts, and an alarm is sent to the ATC. E. Operator Station Display: At a minimum, indicate the following on operator workstation display terminal: 1. Circulating Pumps: a. Heating system and pump demand on/off. b. Lead/lag pump selection status. c. Lead/lag pump manual selection. d. Pump status by differential pressure. e. Lead pump trouble (alarm). f. Both pumps failure (critical alarm). g. Pump run time in hours. h. VFD reference speed. i. VFD actual speed output. j. VFD power/amps. k. VFD trouble alarm. l. Alarm silencing. 2. Building piping loop: a. Differential pressure setpoint at each remote sensor. b. Differential pressure reading at each remote sensor. c. Selection of one or more remote DP sensors to control pump speed. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  3.7 CLASSROOM ENERGY RECOVERY UNIT WITH DEHUMIDIFICATION (RTU-#): A. The unit is scheduled for automatic operation on a time of day basis for Occupied and Unoccupied modes. B. Space temperature sensor and humidity sensor are located in the exhaust air duct of the roof top energy recovery unit. C. When unit is called to start, the outside air and exhaust air dampers open fully. When an auxiliary switch at the damper actuator proves each damper is nearly full open, the fan starts. 1. The unit discharge temperature and humidity setpoints are reset based on the exhaust air temperature. The discharge temperature shall be 58°F at a return air temperature of 78°F and 70°F at an exhaust air temperature of 70°F (adjustable reset schedule). The unit operates in heating, ventilating, and dehumidification-with-reheat modes. D. Heat recovery is the first stage of heating. If the unit is in heating mode, the heat recovery operates at up to maximum as required. The unit heat shall operate as the next stage of heating. E. Hot water coil is the second stage of heating: 1. The three-way control valve shall modulate to maintain the leaving air setpoint provided by the DDC system. 2. The coil pump shall operate on a call for heating or when the outside air temperature is below 36 degrees F. F. Dehumidification: The energy recovery operates to precondition the incoming air. The refrigerant coil stages to meet the discharge temperature setpoint, with reheat from the hot gas input as required. G. When unit is de-energized: outside air damper is closed; exhaust air damper is closed; heating water valve modulates to prevent coil freezing; energy recovery system is deenergized. H. Filter Pressure Drop Monitoring: A filter pressure switch monitors the pressure drop across the filters, with separate switches for prefilters and final filters, and generates a service message specific to each switch when the pressure drop exceeds setpoint. Setpoints shall be at the filter manufacturer’s midrange of serviceable pressure drop, not at the maximum allowable drop. I. Safeties: 1. High limit static pressure sensor (set at 1 inch wc static pressure higher than scheduled external static pressure) in supply main de-energizes the supply fan and activates an alarm. 2. A manual reset freezestat downstream of the heating coil (setpoint 35°F, adjustable) closes the outside air dampers, opens the return air damper, shuts down the fans, and generates an alarm. An air flow switch in the supply duct main confirms the fan is in the desired state (on or off) and generates an environmental alarm if status deviates from start/stop command. J. At a minimum, indicate the following on operator workstation display terminal: 1. Supply and exhaust fan status. 2. Supply and exhaust fan VFD command and speed. 3. 2 position outdoor air and exhaust air damper status. 4. Wheel status. 5. Supply and return smoke detector status. 6. Outdoor, exhaust, and supply air temperature. 7. Outdoor, exhaust and supply air volume in CFM. 8. Supply air set point temperature and reset schedule. 9. Heating valve position. 10. DX cooling stages status. 11. Automatic and manual freeze stat status. 12. Occupied override status. 13. Alarms. a. High leaving air temperature (above 90 deg. F.) b. Low leaving air temperature (below 40 deg. F., after hydronic heating coil.) c. Fan failure. 3.8 BASEBOARD AND FIN TUBE RADIATION A. Space Sensor: Wall-mounted, with setpoint selector and occupied/unoccupied override button. B. Space sensor modulates the 2-position control valve to maintain room temperature (setpoint 70°F occupied/60°F unoccupied, adjustable). C. Operator Station Display: At a minimum, indicate the following on operator workstation display terminal: 1. Space temperature. 2. Valve on/off command. 3.9 RESTROOM / LOCKER ROOM ENERGY RECOVERY UNIT WITH HOT WATER COIL (ERV-#): A. The unit is scheduled for automatic operation on a time of day basis for Occupied and Unoccupied modes. B. Temperature sensor and humidity sensor are located in the return air duct of the energy recovery unit. C. When unit is called to start, the outside air and exhaust air dampers open fully. When an auxiliary switch at the damper actuator proves each damper is nearly full open, the fans start. D. The units associated hot water coil supply air temperature setpoint shall be based on the following reset schedule. The discharge temperature shall be 80°F when the return/exhaust air is 65°F and shall be 70°F when the return/exhaust air temperature is 70°F. E. Heat recovery is the first stage of heating. If the unit is in heating mode, the heat recovery operates at up to maximum as required. F. Hot Water Heating is the second stage of heating: 1. The unit has a hot water coil with a Two-way modulating control valve. 2. The control valve modulates to maintain heating setpoint. G. When unit is de-energized: outside air damper is closed; exhaust air damper is closed; heating water valve modulates to prevent coil freezing; energy recovery system is deenergized. H. Filter Pressure Drop Monitoring: A filter pressure switch monitors the pressure drop across the filters, with separate switches for prefilters and final filters, and generates a service message specific to each switch when the pressure drop exceeds setpoint. Setpoints shall be at the filter manufacturer’s midrange of serviceable pressure drop, not at the maximum allowable drop. I. Safeties: 1. High limit static pressure sensor (set at 1 inch wc static pressure higher than scheduled external static pressure) in supply main de-energizes the supply fan and activates an alarm. 2. A manual reset freezestat downstream of the heating coil (setpoint 35°F, Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  adjustable) closes the outside air dampers, opens the return air damper, shuts down the fans, and generates an alarm. An air flow switch in the supply duct main confirms the fan is in the desired state (on or off) and generates an environmental alarm if status deviates from start/stop command. J. At a minimum, indicate the following on operator workstation display terminal: 1. Supply and exhaust fan status. 2. Supply and exhaust fan VFD command and speed. 3. 2 position outdoor air and exhaust air damper status. 4. Supply and return smoke detector status. 5. Outdoor, exhaust, and supply air temperature. 6. Supply air set point temperature and reset schedule. 7. Heating valve position. 8. DX cooling stages status. 9. Automatic and manual freeze stat status. 10. Occupied override status. 11. Alarms. 3.10 GYMNASIUM & CAFETERIA ROOF TOP UNIT SEQUENCE: A. The unit is scheduled for automatic operation on a time of day basis for Occupied and Unoccupied modes. B. Space temperature sensor and humidity sensor are located in the exhaust air duct of the roof top energy recovery unit. C. When unit is called to start, the outside air and exhaust air dampers open to their minimum position and CO2 levels shall be maintained/tracked. When an auxiliary switch at the damper actuator proves each damper is nearly full open, the fan starts. D. The unit discharge temperature and humidity setpoints are reset based on the exhaust air temperature. The discharge temperature shall be 58°F at a return air temperature of 78°F and 70°F at an exhaust air temperature of 70°F (adjustable reset schedule). The unit operates in heating, ventilating, and dehumidification-with-reheat modes. E. Heat recovery is the first stage of heating. If the unit is in heating mode, the heat recovery operates at up to maximum as required. The unit heat pump shall operate as the next stage of heating when the outdoor air temperature is above 45 °F (adjustable) F. (Gym RTU) Hot Water Heating is the second stage of heating: 1. The ductwork connected to the unit has a hot water coil with a three-way modulating control valve. 2. The control valve modulates to maintain heating setpoint. G. (Cafeteria RTU) Propane burner is the second stage of heating: 1. The unit mounted propane heater shall stage on and off to maintain the heating set point. H. Dehumidification: The energy recovery operates to precondition the incoming air. The refrigerant coil stages to meet the discharge temperature setpoint, with reheat from the hot gas input as required. I. CO2 Controls: 1. Provide a CO2 monitor in the space to measure room air CO2 levels. a. Compare outdoor air CO2 levels with room air CO2 levels and allow the outside air and relief air dampers to modulate down to a low of 5 percent outside air when room air CO2 levels are less than 650 parts per million in excess of outdoor air CO2 levels. If the CO2 level should rise above 650 parts per million in excess of outdoor levels the outside air dampers will modulate open to introduce more fresh air until the level of CO2is reduced back below the required ppm. If the level of CO2 in the room air continues to remain more than 650 parts per million in excess of outdoor levels, then the supply fan speed will be increased until the level of CO2 is reduced back to below the required ppm. If the space pressure exceeds 0.05 in. w.c. the unit exhaust fan shall increase in speed. When the space pressure falls below 0.05 in. w.c. the unit exhaust fan shall decrease in speed. J. Night Occupancy Mode – If the unit is in Unoccupied Mode and the level of CO2 in the room air rises above 1000 parts per million (adjustable), operate the air handling unit in Occupied Mode until the level of CO2 in the room air falls below 700 parts per million (adjustable). K. When unit is de-energized: outside air damper is closed; exhaust air damper is closed; heating water valve modulates to prevent coil freezing; energy recovery system is deenergized. L. Filter Pressure Drop Monitoring: A filter pressure switch monitors the pressure drop across the filters, with separate switches for prefilters and final filters, and generates a service message specific to each switch when the pressure drop exceeds setpoint. Setpoints shall be at the filter manufacturer’s midrange of serviceable pressure drop, not at the maximum allowable drop. M. Safeties: 1. High limit static pressure sensor (set at 1 inch wc static pressure higher than scheduled external static pressure) in supply main de-energizes the supply fan and activates an alarm. 2. A manual reset freezestat downstream of the heating coil (setpoint 35°F, adjustable) closes the outside air dampers, opens the return air damper, shuts down the fans, and generates an alarm. An air flow switch in the supply duct main confirms the fan is in the desired state (on or off) and generates an environmental alarm if status deviates from start/stop command. N. At a minimum, indicate the following on operator workstation display terminal: 1. Supply and exhaust fan status. 2. Supply and exhaust fan VFD command and speed. 3. 2 position outdoor air and exhaust air damper status. 4. Wheel status. 5. Supply and return smoke detector status. 6. Outdoor, exhaust, and supply air temperature. 7. Outdoor, exhaust and supply air volume in CFM. 8. Supply air set point temperature and reset schedule. 9. Heating valve position. 10. DX cooling stages status. 11. Automatic and manual freeze stat status. 12. Occupied override status. 13. Alarms: a. High leaving air temperature (above 90 deg. F.) b. Low leaving air temperature (below 40 deg. F., after hydronic heating coil.) c. Fan failure. 3.11  KITCHEN FUME HOOD FAN (EF-#):  A.  When the wall-mounted fan switch adjacent to hood light switch is energized, the  exhaust fan runs. The hood controller shall provide all hood controls.  B. Operator Station Display: At a minimum, indicate the following on operator workstation display terminal: 1. Fan switch on/off status. 3.12 KITCHEN ROOF TOP UNIT: A. The unit is scheduled for automatic operation on a time of day basis for Occupied and Unoccupied modes. B. Space temperature sensor and humidity sensor are located in the kitchen. C. When unit is called to start by the hood controller, the outside air and exhaust air dampers open fully. When an auxiliary switch at the damper actuator proves each damper is nearly full open, the fan starts. 1. The unit discharge temperature and humidity setpoints are reset based on the space temperature and humidity sensors. The unit shall modulate its cooling and propane heater to maintain the space temperature set point. D. Dehumidification: The energy recovery operates to precondition the incoming air. The refrigerant coil stages to meet the discharge temperature setpoint, with reheat from the hot gas input as required. E. When unit is de-energized: outside air damper is closed; exhaust air damper is closed; heating water valve modulates to prevent coil freezing; energy recovery system is deenergized. F. Filter Pressure Drop Monitoring: A filter pressure switch monitors the pressure drop across the filters, with separate switches for prefilters and final filters, and generates a service message specific to each switch when the pressure drop exceeds setpoint. Setpoints shall be at the filter manufacturer’s midrange of serviceable pressure drop, not at the maximum allowable drop. G. Safeties: 1. High limit static pressure sensor (set at 1 inch wc static pressure higher than scheduled external static pressure) in supply main de-energizes the supply fan and activates an alarm. 2. A manual reset freezestat downstream of the propane heater (setpoint 35°F, adjustable) closes the outside air dampers, opens the return air damper, shuts down the fans, and generates an alarm. An air flow switch in the supply duct main confirms the fan is in the desired state (on or off) and generates an environmental alarm if status deviates from start/stop command. H. At a minimum, indicate the following on operator workstation display terminal: 1. Supply and exhaust fan status. 2. Supply and exhaust fan VFD command and speed. 3. 2 position outdoor air and exhaust air damper status. 4. Supply and return smoke detector status. 5. Outdoor, exhaust, and supply air temperature. 6. Supply air set point temperature. 7. DX cooling stages status. 8. Automatic and manual freeze stat status. 9. Occupied override status. 10. Alarms: a. High leaving air temperature (above 90 deg. F.) b. Low leaving air temperature (below 40 deg. F., after hydronic heating coil.) c. Fan failure. 3.13 BASEBOARD AND FIN TUBE RADIATION A. Space Sensor: Wall-mounted, with setpoint selector and occupied/unoccupied override button. B. Space sensor modulates the 2-position control valve to maintain room temperature (setpoint 70°F occupied/60°F unoccupied, adjustable). C. Operator Station Display: At a minimum, indicate the following on operator workstation display terminal: 1. Space temperature. 2. Valve on/off command. 3.14 CABINET UNIT HEATERS (CUH) A. Space sensor: Wall-mounted, except where sensor is indicated on the Drawings to be mounted in unit return air. Blank cover, without setpoint dial or thermometer. B. Setpoint: Provide occupied/unoccupied control. Initial setpoints (adjustable): 1. Cabinet Unit Heaters in spaces with exterior doors (most Stairs, Entries, and Vestibules): 65°F occupied/55°F unoccupied. 2. Cabinet Unit Heaters in spaces without exterior doors: 68°F occupied/60°F unoccupied. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  C. 2-way or 3-way (as indicated) control valve opens on demand from space sensor, and strap-on return aquastat cycles the fan. Provide strap-on aquastat (location: on return piping unless otherwise detailed) set at 100°F (adjustable) to prevent fan operation when hot water is not available. D. Mount strap-on aquastat in orientation to be most readily visible from the floor. Insulate over the sensor bulb. E. Operator Station Display: At a minimum, indicate the following on operator workstation display terminal: 1. Space temperature. 2. Unit on/off command. 3.15 EXHAUST FANS A. Space sensor: Wall-mounted, blank cover, without setpoint dial or thermometer. B. Fan status is monitored by current sensors. C. When a fan associated with an AHU is placed in the occupied mode of operation, the fan’s motorized damper opens. The fan is commanded on upon closure of the damper auxiliary switch. When the air handler is in the unoccupied mode, the fan is commanded off and its respective motorized damper closes. Configure controls to allow control and override of these fans through the operator workstation graphics. D. General Exhaust Fans: General exhaust is on a time-of-day function. The motorized damper opens; when the damper auxiliary switch closes, the fan starts. E. Electrical Rooms, Boiler Room: As space temperature increases above setpoint (80°F, adjustable), the fan's motorized damper opens, and associated intake louver or hood dampers (if any) open. When the fan damper auxiliary switch closes, the fan starts. When space set point temperature is satisfied, the fan is commanded off and the dampers close. F. Lab General Space Exhaust: Each lab shall have a gas and exhaust controller mounted near the entrance to the space. The plumbing schedule lists the controller information. When the exhaust fan is indexed on via the controller the associated exhaust fan shall be turned on. When the controller is indexed off via the controller the associated exhaust fan shall turn off. Note one exhaust fan serves two lab spaces. When either controller is indexed on the exhaust fan shall operate. G. Operator Station Display: At a minimum, indicate the following on operator workstation display terminal: 1. Exhaust fan on/off command. 2. Exhaust fan airflow status. 3. Damper auxiliary switch open/closed. 4. Fan alarm status. 5. Space temperature where required. 6. Space set point where required. 7. Leak detection warning and critical alarm status, and reset points. 8. Provide a high temperature alarm set to 80 deg. F. (adj.) 3.16 DUCTLESS SPLIT SYSTEMS AND MINI-SPLIT SYSTEMS (IT rooms) A. Space sensor: Wall-mounted, blank cover, without setpoint dial or thermometer. B. The factory-furnished hard-wired wall-mounted controller cycles the indoor fan on a call for cooling (setpoint 75°F, adjustable). The rooftop condensing unit compressor and its condenser fan cycle as required. The Mechanical Subcontractor is responsible for controller setup and programming. C. The wall-mounted sensor monitors space temperature. D. Operator Station Display: At a minimum, indicate the following on operator workstation display terminal: 1. Space temperature. 2. High room temperature alarm (above 90 deg. F. ADJ.) 3.17 DOMESTIC WATER HEATER AND CIRCULATING PUMPS: A. Water heater is enabled whenever any area of the building is in the occupied cycle, and de-energized when all areas of the building are in the unoccupied cycle. B. The unit-mounted controls cycle the gas burner to maintain water temperature (initial setpoint 140°F, adjustable). C. Domestic hot water circulating pump HWC-# is energized whenever the water heater is enabled in the occupied cycle. D. Operator Station Display: At a minimum, indicate the following on operator workstation display terminal: 1. Occupied/unoccupied status. 2. Pumps command on/off. 3. Pumps status. 4. Setpoint of external storage tank. 5. Supply water temperature downstream of mixing valve. 6. Water heater alarms. 7. Water heater command on/off. 8. Water temperature of external storage tank. 3.18 FIRE ALARM SYSTEM SHUT-DOWN INTERFACE A. For starters that are associated with equipment that is required to be shut down upon a fire alarm condition, provide input contacts within the starter enclosure to interface with the building(s fire alarm system. Upon receipt of a signal from the building(s fire alarm system, power to load side of the starter is turned off. Circuitry is provided to ensure that power is off whether the starter is in the “AUTO”, “HAND” or “BYPASS” mode. If this feature is not available from the starter manufacturer, provide a contactor on the line side of the starter to accomplish the same function. The contactor shall meet the requirements of Division 26. B. Every fan or air-moving system serving ducts which have fire dampers or fire/smoke dampers shall shut down upon a fire alarm condition. 3.19 RE-START PHASING AFTER POWER INTERRUPTION A. Upon a power interruption, a loss of power, or at morning start-up, equipment of electrical power greater than or equal to 1.0 HP is started in a staged manner which allows a time delay of 30 seconds between the start of each device. 3.20 PRE-OCCUPANCY BUILDING FLUSH-OUT A. Provide a pre-occupancy building flush-out consisting of a 10 day, 24 hour/day operation of the air handling units in 100 percent outside air mode while the units are in occupied mode. Ensure that the building flush-out occurs at a time when outdoor air temperature conditions are such that there is no risk of freezing heating coils and discharge air temperatures do not drop below specified levels. B. Submit records of flush-out, including a sign-off sheet including names of Contractor’s and Subcontractors’ representatives and Owner’s representative witnessing the flush-out. END OF SECTION 230900 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  SECTION 232113 HYDRONIC PIPING PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SECTION INCLUDES A. Pipe and Pipe Fittings For: 1. Heating water piping system. 2. Equipment drains and overflows. B. Valves: 1. Gate valves. 2. Globe or angle valves. 3. Ball valves. 4. Plug valves. 5. Butterfly valves. 6. Check valves. 1.2 PRODUCTS FURNISHED BUT NOT INSTALLED UNDER THIS SECTION A. Access Doors. 1.3 RELATED SECTIONS A. Division 08 Section “Access Doors and Frames.” B. Division 09 Section “Painting.” C. Division 23 Section “Expansion Fittings and Loops for HVAC.” D. Division 23 Section “Sleeves and Escutcheons for HVAC Piping.” E. Division 23 Section “Hangers and Supports for HVAC Piping and Equipment. F. Division 23 Section “HVAC Piping Insulation.” G. Division 23 Section “Hydronic Specialties.” H. Division 23 Section “HVAC Water Treatment”: Pipe cleaning. HYDRONIC PIPING 232113 -1 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  1.4  REFERENCES  A.  ASME -Boiler and Pressure Vessel Codes, SEC 9 -Qualification Standard for Welding  and Brazing Procedures, Welders, Brazers, and Welding and Brazing Operators.  B.  ASME B16.3 -Malleable Iron Threaded Fittings Class 50 and 300.  C.  ASME B16.18 -Cast Copper Alloy Solder Joint Pressure Fittings.  D.  ASME B16.22 -Wrought Copper and Copper Alloy Solder Joint Pressure Fittings.  E.  ASME B31.5 -Refrigeration Piping.  F.  ASME B31.9 -Building Services Piping.  G. ASME B36.10M -Welded and Seamless Wrought Steel Pipe. H. ASTM A53 -Pipe, Steel, Black and Hot-Dipped, Zinc Coated Welded and Seamless. I. ASTM A234 -Piping Fittings of Wrought Carbon Steel and Alloy Steel for Moderate and Elevated Temperatures. J. ASTM A240 -Standard Specification for Chromium and Chromium-Nickel Stainless Steel Plate, Sheet, and Strip for Pressure Vessels and for General Applications. K. ASTM A312 -Standard Specification for Seamless, Welded, and Heavily Cold Worked Austenitic Stainless Steel Pipes. L. ASTM A403 -Standard Specification for Wrought Austenitic Stainless Steel Piping Fittings. M. ASTM B32 -Solder Metal. N. ASTM B88 -Seamless Copper Water Tube. O. ASTM D256 -Standard Test Methods for Determining the Izod Pendulum Impact Resistance of Plastics. P. ASTM F708 -Design and Installation of Rigid Pipe Hangers. Q. AWS A5.8 -Brazing Filler Metal. R. AWS D1.1 -Structural Welding Code. S. AWWA C105 -Polyethylene Encasement for Ductile Iron Piping for Water and Other Liquids. T. AWWA C110 -Ductile -Iron and Grey -Iron Fittings 3 in. through 48 in. (75 mm through 1200 mm), for Water and Other Liquids. U. AWWA C111 -Rubber-Gasket Joints for Ductile Iron and Grey-Iron Pressure Pipe and HYDRONIC PIPING 232113 -2 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  Fittings. V. AWWA C151 -Ductile-Iron Pipe, Centrifugally Cast in Metal Molds or Sand-Lined Molds, for Water or Other Liquids. W. MSS SP58 -Pipe Hangers and Supports -Materials, Design and Manufacture. X. MSS SP69 -Pipe Hangers and Supports -Selection and Application. Y. MSS SP89 -Pipe Hangers and Supports -Fabrication and Installation Practices. Z. NSF/ANSI 14 – Plastic Piping System Components and Related Materials. AA. NSF/ANSI 61 -Drinking Water System Components. 1.5 SUBMITTALS A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Submittal Procedures.” B. Product Data: Include data on pipe materials, pipe fittings, valves, and accessories. Provide Manufacturers catalogue information. Indicate valve data and ratings. C. Welders Certificate: Include welder’s certification of compliance with ASME SEC 9 and AWS D1.1. D. Manufacturer's Installation Instructions: Indicate hanging and support methods, joining procedures. 1.6 PROJECT RECORD DOCUMENTS A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Closeout Procedures.” B. Record actual locations of valves. 1.7 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE DATA A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Operation and Maintenance Data.” B. Maintenance Data: Include installation instructions, spare parts lists, exploded assembly views. 1.8 QUALIFICATIONS A. Manufacturer: Company specializing in manufacturing the products specified in this Section with minimum 3 years’ experience. B. Installer: Company specializing in performing the work of this Section with minimum 3 years’ experience. C. Welders: Certify in accordance with ASME SEC 9 and AWS D1.1. HYDRONIC PIPING 232113 -3 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  D. Pressed Pipe Fittings: Submit documentation of fitting-manufacturer training of installers or their on-site supervisors, with names of individuals. 1.9 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS A. Conform to ASME B31.9 code for installation of piping system. B. Welding Materials and Procedures: Conform to ASME SEC 9 and applicable state labor regulations. C. Provide certificate of compliance from authority having jurisdiction indicating approval of welders. 1.10 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Deliver, store, protect and handle products to site under provisions of Division 01 Section “Product Requirements.” B. Accept valves on site in shipping containers with labeling in place. Inspect for damage. C. Provide temporary protective coating on cast iron and steel valves. D. Provide temporary end caps and closures on piping and fittings. Maintain in place until installation. E. Protect piping systems from entry of foreign materials by temporary covers, completing sections of the work, and isolating parts of completed system. 1.11 ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS A. Do not install underground piping when bedding is wet or frozen. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 HEATING WATER PIPING, ABOVE GROUND A. Steel Pipe: ASTM A53, Schedule 40 for sizes less than 12 inch (300 mm), 0.375 inch (10 mm) wall for sizes 12 inch (300 mm) and over, black. 1. Fittings: ASTM B16.3, malleable iron or ASTM A234, forged steel welding type fittings. 2. Joints: Schedule 40 threaded for pipe sizes 2 inch (50.8 mm) and smaller, and AWS D1.1, welded for pipe sizes over 2 inch (50.8 mm). 3. Grooved and Shouldered Pipe End Couplings: As specified in this Section, with grooved steel pipe, is an acceptable alternate to the above for water service operating at temperatures from -30 to 230 degrees F (-30 to 110 degrees C), utilizing grade E, EPDM gasket compound. B. Copper Tubing: ASTM B88, Type L hard drawn. HYDRONIC PIPING 232113 -4 1. Allowed only for pipe sizes 2 inch (50.8 mm) and smaller. 2. Fittings: ASME B16.18, cast brass, or ASME B16.22, solder wrought copper. 3. Joints: Solder or braze, or press fittings. 2.2 EQUIPMENT DRAINS AND OVERFLOWS A. Steel Pipe: ASTM A53, Schedule 40 galvanized. 1. Fittings: Galvanized cast iron, or ASTM B16.3 malleable iron. 2. Joints: Threaded, or grooved mechanical couplings. B. Copper Tubing: ASTM B88, Type L, hard drawn. 1. Fittings: ASME B16.18, cast brass, or ASME B16.22 solder wrought copper. 2. Joints: Solder or braze, or press fittings. 2.3 BRAZING MATERIALS – 15 percent Silver for copper, brass, and bronze A. Manufacturers: 1. Harris (Product: Stay-Silv 15). 2. Lucas-Milhaupt (Product: Sil-Fos 15). 3. Wolverine (Product: Silvaloy 15). 4. No substitutions. B. Nominal Composition: 5.0 percent phosphorus, 15.0 percent silver, 0.15 percent other elements (total), remainder copper. Cadmium-free. C. Physical Properties: 1. Color: Yellow/Gray 2. Solidus: 1190 degrees F (643 degrees C) 3. Liquidus: 1480 degrees F (802 degrees C) 4. Brazing Range: 1300 – 1500 degrees F (704-816 degrees C) 5. Electrical Conductivity: 9.9 percent IACS 6. Electrical Resistivity: 17.40 Microhm-cm HYDRONIC PIPING 232113 -5 Barnstead School District, SAU 86 May 20, 2025 Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations TTG Proj No. 5199 Bid Pack No2 D. Specification Compliance: 1. ANSI/AWS A5.8, class BCuP-5 2. ASME SFA5.8, class BCuP-5 3. Optional: a. QQB 650C, class BCuP-5 b. QQB 654A, class BCuP-5 c. QQB 654, class BCuP-5 E. Flux: 1. Harris (Stay-Silv For copper-to-brass joints. No flux required for copper-to.copper joints). 2.4 BRAZING MATERIALS – 35 percent Silver for brazing to ferrous metals (steel) A. Manufacturers: 1. Harris (Product: Safety-Silv 35). 2. Lucas-Milhaupt (Product: Braze 351). 3. Wolverine (Product: Silvaloy A-35). 4. No substitutions. B. Nominal Composition: 35.0 percent silver, 33 percent Zinc, 0.15 percent other elements (total), remainder copper. Cadmium-free. C. Physical Properties: 1. Color: Yellow/Gray 2. Solidus: 1250 degrees F (677 degrees C) 3. Liquidus: 1410 degrees F (732 degrees C) 4. Electrical Conductivity: 19.8 percent IACS 5. Electrical Resistivity: 8.2 Microhm-cm D. Specification Compliance: 1. ANSI/AWS A5.8, class BAg-5 2. ASME SFA5.8, class BCuP-5 HYDRONIC PIPING 232113 -6 E. Flux: 1. Harris (Stay-Silv white flux, or where heating cycles are extended, Stay-Silv black flux). 2.5 SOLDER MATERIALS: A. Manufacturers: 1. Harris (Product: Stay-Brite). 2. Lucas-Milhaupt (Product: Clean ‘n Brite). 3. Wolverine (Product: Silvabrite). 4. No substitutions. B. Nominal Composition: Alloy of silver and tin (3-6 percent Ag, remainder Sn). Antimony-free. C. Physical Properties: 1. Color: Bright Silver 2. Solidus: 430 degrees F (221 degrees C) 3. Liquidus: 430 degrees F (221 degrees C) 4. Electrical Conductivity: 16.4 percent IACS 5. Shear Strength: 10,600 psi (73 MPa) 6. Tensile Strength: 14,000 psi (96 MPa) 7. Elongation: 48 percent D. Specification Compliance: 1. NSF 51 2. ASTM B32-89, Alloy Grade Sn96 3. Federal Spec. QQ-S-571E, Class Sn 96 with exception to QPL paragraph 3.1 4. J-STD-006, Sn96Ag04A E. Flux: 1. Harris (Product: Stay Clean Paste Flux, Stay Clean Liquid Flux (used with 4 inch or larger copper tubing also stainless steels), or Bridgit Water Soluble Paste Flux). HYDRONIC PIPING 232113 -7 2. Canfield (Product: Aqua-Brite or AB Cream Flux). Glycerin-based, water soluble. 2.6 UNIONS, FLANGES, AND COUPLINGS A. Unions for Pipe 2 inch (50 mm) and Under: 1. Ferrous Piping: 150 psig (1034 kPa) malleable iron, threaded. 2. Copper Pipe: Bronze, soldered joints. B. Flanges for Pipe Over 2 Inch (50 mm): 1. Ferrous Piping: 150 psig (1034 kPa) forged steel, slip-on. 2. Copper Piping: Bronze. 3. Polypropylene Pipe: a. Manufacturer: Aquatherm, Greenpipe product line, no substitutions. 4. Gaskets: 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) thick preformed neoprene or EPDM, reinforced as required for the system operating pressure, up to relief valve setting. C. Grooved and Shouldered Pipe End Couplings: 1. Approved Manufacturers: a. Victaulic Company. b. Anvil International (division of Mueller Water Products, Inc.) -Gruvlok product line. c. Grinnell Mechanical Products (division of Tyco Fire Suppression & Building Products Co.). d. No Substitutions. 2. Products: a. Housing Clamps: Malleable iron to engage and lock, designed to permit some angular deflection, contraction, and expansion. b. Sealing Gasket: C-shape EPDM elastomer composition for operating temperature range from -30 degrees F (-34 degrees C) to 230 degrees F (110 degrees C). This is the standard gasket material suitable for water and glycol service. For other services, verify material. c. Accessories: Steel bolts, nuts, and washers with zinc plating. 3. Note: Grooved couplings are not allowed where concealed above hard ceilings. HYDRONIC PIPING 232113 -8 D. Dielectric Connections: Union with galvanized or plated steel threaded end, copper solder end, water impervious isolation barrier. 2.7 PRESS FITTINGS AND STAINLESS STEEL PIPING SYSTEMS A. Approved Manufacturers: 1. Viega LLC, Wichita, KS -ProPress System with Smart Connect feature. 2. Or approved equal. B. Fitting and Valve Products: 1. Wrought copper and cast copper alloy (brass or bronze) fittings and valves for copper piping. 2. Adapter fittings for transition connections to threaded fittings and dissimilar materials. 3. Available sizes: 1/2 inch to 4 inch (12.7 mm to 101 mm). C. Features: 1. Seals: O-ring type, factory installed in a fitting bead. Seals in larger sizes shall include a separator ring and a stainless steel grip ring. 2. Seal Materials: EPDM (color shiny black) in copper and stainless steel fittings for hydronic, potable water, and drain systems. FKM (color dull black) field-installed in stainless steel fittings for hydronic, HBNR (color yellow) in copper fittings for fuel oil, fuel gases, and compressed air systems. 3. Colored Identification Dots: a. Copper Fittings: 1) Green for EPDM seal. 2) Yellow for ProPressG fittings with HNBR seal. 4. Smart Connect feature provides a leakage path to allow water and air to leak past any unpressed connection, for quick identification during pressure testing. D. Temperature/Pressure ratings (with appropriate type seals): 1. Hydronic Systems: 0 to 250 degrees F (-17 to 121 degrees C) up to 200 psig (1723 kPa), at up to 100 percent maximum concentration of ethylene or propylene glycol. In solar systems, the FKM seal is suitable for temperature spikes up to 320 degrees F (160 degrees C). 2. Fuel Gases: -40 to 160 degrees F (-40 to 71 degrees C) ambient, up to 125 psig (861 kPa). HYDRONIC PIPING 232113 -9 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  E. Accessories: 1. Pressing: Use pressing tools, actuator jaws, and pressing rings, Ridgid brand manufactured by Ridge Tool Company, as recommended by the fitting manufacturer for each type of fitting. 2. Lubricants: Do not use. Not recommended by fitting manufacturer. 3. Cutting Tools: For copper or stainless steel pipe, use wheeled cutting tool, or cutting tool approved by the fitting manufacturer. Use deburring tool or reamer after cutting. 2.8 PIPE HANGERS AND SUPPORTS A. See Division 23 Section “Hangers and Supports for HVAC Piping and Equipment.” 2.9 SLEEVES A. See Division 23 Section “Sleeves and Escutcheons for HVAC Piping.” 2.10 VALVES A. Manufacturers: 1. Nibco. 2. Anvil International -Gruvlok product line 3. Apollo. 4. Crane 5. Hammond. 6. Milwaukee. 7. Veriflo division of Parker Hannifin Corp. – PVC and CPVC plastic valves. 8. Victaulic Company. 9. Watts. 10. Wheatley. 11. No substitutions. B. Gate Valves Over 2 inch (50 mm): 1. Iron body, bronze trim, bolted bonnet, rising stem, handwheel, outside screw and yoke, solid wedge disc with bronze seat rings, flanged ends. HYDRONIC PIPING 232113 -10 2. 125 lb S.W.P., 200 lb W.O.G. C. Globe or Angle Valves: 1. Up To and Including 2 inch (50 mm): a. Bronze body, bronze trim, screwed or union bonnet, rising stem and handwheel, inside screw, renewable composition disc and bronze seat, solder or threaded ends. b. 150 lb S.W.P., 300 lb W.O.G. 2. Over 2 inch (50 mm): a. Iron body, bronze trim, bolted bonnet, rising stem, handwheel, outside screw and yoke, rotating plug-type disc with renewable seat ring and disc, flanged ends. b. 125 lb S.W.P., 200 lb W.O.G. D. Ball Valves: 1. Up To and Including 2 inch (50 mm): a. Bronze two piece body, chrome plated brass ball, teflon seats and stuffing box ring, lever handle, solder or threaded ends. b. 150 lb S.W.P., 300 lb W.O.G. 2. Over 2 Inch (50 mm): a. Cast steel body, chrome plated steel ball, teflon seat and stuffing box seals, lever handle, flanged. b. 150 lb S.W.P., 285 lb W.O.G. 3. Stem Extensions: Provide ball valves in insulated piping with stem extensions to allow for continuous thickness of field-installed insulation. E. Plug Valves: 1. Up To and Including 2 inch (50 mm): a. Bronze body, bronze tapered plug, 70 percent port opening, non-lubricated, teflon packing, threaded ends. b. Operator: One plug valve wrench for every ten plug valves minimum of one. 2. Over 2 Inch (50 mm): HYDRONIC PIPING 232113 -11 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  a. Cast iron body and plug, 70 percent port opening, pressure lubricated, teflon packing, flanged ends. b. Operator: Each plug valve with a wrench with set screw. F. Butterfly Valves: 1. Body: Cast or ductile iron with resilient replaceable EPDM seat, wafer or lug ends, extended neck. 2. Disc: Aluminum bronze or chrome plated ductile iron. 3. Operator: 10 position lever handle for shut-off service, infinite position lever handle with memory stop for throttling service, handwheel and gear drive for sizes 8" (203 mm) and larger. 4. Pressure rating shall be 150 psi at 225 degrees F (1034 kPa at 107 degrees C). G. Swing Check Valves: 1. Up to and Including 2 inch (50 mm): Bronze body, bronze trim, bronze rotating swing disc, with composition disc, solder or threaded ends. 2. Over 2 inch (50 mm): Iron body, bronze trim, bronze or bronze faced rotating swing disc, renewable disc and seat, flanged ends. H. Spring Loaded Check Valves: Iron body, bronze trim, split plate, hinged with stainless steel spring, resilient seal bonded to body, wafer or threaded lug ends. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 PREPARATION A. Ream pipe and tube ends. Remove burrs. B. Remove scale and dirt on inside and outside before assembly. C. Prepare piping connections to equipment with flanges or unions. D. Keep open ends of pipe free from scale and dirt. Protect open ends with temporary plugs or caps. E. After completion, fill, clean, and treat systems. Refer to Division 23 Section “HVAC Water Treatment.” 3.2 INSTALLATION A. Install in accordance with Manufacturer's instructions. B. Install components furnished under other Section and Divisions of the Specifications. Such items may include but are not limited to: Sensors furnished under Division 23 HYDRONIC PIPING 232113 -12 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  Section “Instrumentation and Control for Mechanical Systems.” C. Install heating water piping to ASME B31.9. D. Pipe used shall be new material, and threads on piping shall be full length and clean cut with inside edges reamed smooth to full inside bore. E. Minimum pipe size allowed for hydronic piping shall be 3/4 inch (19 mm). Piping less than 3/4 inch (19 mm) shall not be allowed for these piping systems. F. Route piping in orderly manner, parallel to building structure, and maintain gradient. G. Install piping to conserve building space, and not interfere with use of space. H. Group piping whenever practical at common elevations. I. Erect piping to provide for the easy passage and noiseless circulation of water under working conditions. J. Slope piping and arrange systems to drain at low points. Use eccentric reducers to maintain top of pipe level. Slope water piping 1 inch in 40 feet (1:480) and arrange to drain at low points. Slope piping up in direction of water flow. K. On closed systems, equip low points with 3/4 inch (19 mm) drain valves and hose nipples. Provide, at high points of mains, collecting chambers and high capacity float operated automatic air vents, with ball valves on their inlets to valve off after initial system startup. Provide, at high points of branches, manual air vents with air chambers. L. Use main sized saddle type branch connections for directly connecting branch lines to mains in steel piping if main is at least 1 pipe size larger than the branch for up to 6 inch (152 mm) mains and if main is at least 2 pipe sizes larger than branch for 8 inch (203 mm) and larger mains. Do not project branch pipes inside the main pipe. M. Caulking of threads will not be allowed on any piping. N. Pipe joint compound shall be put on male threads only. O. Where more than one piping system material is specified, ensure system components are compatible and joined to ensure the integrity of the system is not jeopardized. Provide necessary joining fittings. Ensure flanges, union, and couplings for servicing are consistently provided. P. Dissimilar Metals: Use non-conducting dielectric connections whenever jointing dissimilar metals. Cast red-brass (not yellow brass) or bronze-bodied fittings such as valves and couplings may be used when joining steel to copper, steel to stainless steel, or copper to stainless steel. Steel and stainless steel may connect directly to iron, but copper may not connect directly to iron. Q. Where welded joints are required, steel piping shall be installed by the use of the HYDRONIC PIPING 232113 -13 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  oxyacetylene or electric welding process, except immediate connections to accessible equipment may be threaded. Piping shall have butt welds with welding fittings, standard factory fabricated tees, elbows, reducers, caps, and accessories. Branch outlets 2 inch (50.8 mm) and smaller shall be made by the use of approved welding type half-couplings, “Weldolet” or “Threadolet” fittings. 1. Piping smaller than 2 inch (50.8 mm) may be installed at the Contractor’s option with welding type, or threaded type fittings, except that piping regardless of size concealed in trenches or inaccessible building construction (for example, concealed behind sheetrock walls or concealed above sheetrock ceilings) shall be welded. 2. Offsets shall be installed with long radius welding elbows. 3. Welding shall be executed only by certified welding mechanics in accordance with the best practice of the trade. R. Grooved Mechanical Couplings: 1. Use grooved mechanical couplings and fasteners in accessible locations only. Grooved mechanical couplings are not allowed in areas such as behind gypsum wallboard walls and above gypsum wallboard or wood ceilings. 2. Install in strict accordance with manufacturer’s instructions. Nothing in this Specification is intended to supersede manufacturer’s instructions and recommendations. 3. Prepare pipe ends properly, and check again before coupling installation. 4. Lubricate gaskets as recommended. Check gasket before installation. 5. Do not lubricate coupling mating surfaces (bolt pads) or bolt threads, because this might affect torque readings. 6. Verify that pipe-end separation (all couplings) and deflection from centerline (flexible couplings only) do not exceed manufacturer’s specifications. For piping which will operate at a colder temperature than installation temperature (for example, chilled water systems), butt pipes together to provide maximum contraction capability. For piping which will operate at a warmer temperature (for example, heating systems), separate pipe ends the maximum allowed amount to provide maximum expansion capability. Some systems operate at mixed temperatures (for example, cooling tower condenser water systems) and may require different spacing for different sections of the system, and/or a spacing somewhere between minimum and maximum in proportion to the need for expansion and contraction. 7. NOTE: Tighten nuts evenly by alternating sides until tightened to recommended torque. Make sure the housings’ keys completely engage the grooves. Make sure the offsets are equal at the bolt pads, during tightening and when fully tightened. NOTE: It is important to tighten nuts evenly to prevent gasket HYDRONIC PIPING 232113 -14 pinching. a. Victaulic Couplings: On rigid couplings with angled bolt pads, pads will be offset when tightened. On flexible couplings, bolt pads will be in contact and aligned when tightened. b. Anvil and Grinnell Couplings: On rigid couplings, bolt pads will have up to 1/16-inch (1.59 mm) gap when tightened. On flexible couplings, bolt pads will be in contact when tightened. 8. If an impact wrench or other power tool is used to tighten, use extra care. NOTE: Anvil International does not recommend use of impact wrenches with their Gruvlok products. 9. For couplings with manufacturer torque specifications, verify torque on each bolt. Do not exceed torque specification by more than 25 percent. S. Sleeve pipe passing through partitions, walls and floors: 1. See Division 23 Section “Sleeves and Escutcheons for HVAC Piping.” 2. Set sleeves in position in advance of concrete work. Provide suitable reinforcing around sleeves. 3. Extend sleeves through floors as follows: In locations not otherwise indicated, 2 in. (50 mm) above finished floor level. In normally-dry locations such as finished office spaces under fintube and baseboard radiation, 1 in. (25 mm) above finished floor level. Finished floor level includes the thickness of floor finish materials such as carpet and tile. Caulk sleeves full depth and provide floor plate. 4. Where piping passes through floor, ceiling or wall, close off space between pipe sleeve and construction with non-combustible insulation or with approved firestopping material when penetrating fire rated floors, ceilings or walls. Provide tight fitting metal escutcheons on both ends of sleeves to prevent movement of sleeve during piping expansion. Escutcheons shall be sized slightly larger than outside diameter of piping and smaller than diameter of sleeve. Escutcheons shall be rigidly secured to walls. 5. Where piping passes through fire rated floors, ceilings or walls, close off space between pipe insulation and sleeve with approved firestopping material 6. Install chrome-plated escutcheons where piping passes through finished surfaces. T. Provide clearance in hangers and from structure and other equipment for installation of insulation and access to valves and fittings. Refer to Division 23 Section “HVAC Piping Insulation.” U. In the erection of mains, use special care in the support, working into place without HYDRONIC PIPING 232113 -15 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  springing or forcing, and proper allowance made for expansion. V. Pipes shall be anchored, guided, and otherwise supported, where necessary, to prevent vibration or to control expansion. W. Make such offsets as are shown and required to place the pipes and risers in proper position to avoid other work. X. Take branch lines off bottom of mains or at 45 degree bottom angle, as space permits. Y. Use unions, flanges, and couplings downstream of valves and at equipment or apparatus connections. Do not use direct welded or threaded connections to valves, equipment or other apparatus. Z. Install a sufficient number of unions or flanged fittings to facilitate making possible future alterations or repairs. AA. Install concealed pipes close to building structure to keep furring to a minimum. BB. Provide access where valves and fittings are not exposed. CC. Where pipe support members are welded to structural building framing, scrape, brush clean, and apply one coat of zinc rich primer to welds. DD. Prepare unfinished pipe, fittings, supports, and accessories, ready for finish painting. Refer to Division 09 Section “Painting.” 3.3 VALVES A. Valve Type Selection: 1. Use gate, ball or butterfly valves for shut-off and to isolate equipment, part of systems, or vertical risers. 2. Use Bronze Ball Valves for general shut-off service in heating and cooling system piping 2 inch (50.8 mm) and smaller and at heating terminal units 2 inch (50.8 mm) and smaller, including fin-tube radiation, unit heaters, convectors and fan coil units. 3. Use Combination Balancing, Flow Measuring and Tight Shut-off Valves at terminal heating and cooling units, zone branches and as indicated. 4. Use Bronze Ball Valves for drain valves with hose connections. Provide valve of size indicated; if size isn’t indicated, provide at least 3/4 inch (19 mm) valve size. Provide outlet fitting for standard “garden hose” with 3/4 inch (19 mm) hose threads. Provide brass cap with retainer chain. Compression-type “boiler drain valves” are not allowed. B. With the exception of valves which must be properly sized to ensure design flow rates HYDRONIC PIPING 232113 -16 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  (such as balancing valves), valves shall be line sized. C. For isolation valves, control valves and balancing valves located above suspended ceilings and in areas that are not visible to building occupants (for example, mechanical rooms), provide yellow colored surveyors tape. Permanently attach tape to valve handles and run tape down to 10 inches (254 mm) above ceiling or 12 inches (305 mm) below valve handle where ceilings do not exist (for example, mechanical rooms). D. Standard details for heating and cooling coils are based on single coil arrangements. For heating and cooling coils that are supplied in a split coil arrangement, with 2 or more individual coils, provide additional piping and balancing valves at each coil to ensure that flow through each coil is proportional to the percentage of total coil face area that the coil occupies. E. Install valves with stems upright or horizontal, not inverted. 3.4 CLEANING A. After satisfactory completion of pressure tests, before permanently connecting equipment, strainers, and the like, clean equipment thoroughly, blow and flush piping for a sufficient length of time as directed, so that interiors will be free of foreign matter. Perform cleaning in the presence of an authorized representative of the Architect. Provide a minimum of 10 days notification to the Architect prior to system cleaning. B. Fill, vent and circulate the system with approved solution in accordance with equipment (boiler, piping, coils, and others) manufacturer’s recommendation, allowing it to reach design or operating temperatures. After circulating for 6 hours, drain the system completely and remove and clean strainer screens. Perform cleaning in the presence of an authorized representative of the Architect. Provide a minimum of 10 days notification to the Architect prior to system cleaning. C. Fill and vent system as required. D. Manually vent heat transfer units and high points of the system. E. Adjust the pressure reducing valve to provide minimum of 5 psig (35 kPa) pressure at the highest point of the system. F. After system has been completely filled, start zone pumps and circulate cold water for a short time to dislodge small air bubbles, and return them to air extraction device. G. Raise water temperature to 200 degrees F (93 degrees C) while operating pumps. H. Stop pump and vent radiation and high points of the system. Normal operation may now be started at any time. 3.5 TESTING A. No joint or section of piping shall be left untested. HYDRONIC PIPING 232113 -17 B. Before testing piping systems, remove, or otherwise protect from damage, control devices, air vents, and other parts which are not designed to stand test pressures. C. Test piping for leaks under 100 psig (689 kPa) air pressure with soap suds prior to hydrostatic testing. D. Test piping hydrostatically to 1-1/2 times the maximum systems operating pressure, but in no case to less than 75 psig (517 kPa), for at least 4 consecutive hours, during which time pressure shall remain constant without pumping. E. Test and obtain Architect’s approval before painting, covering, or concealing piping, including swing joints. END OF SECTION 232113 HYDRONIC PIPING 232113 -18 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  SECTION 232118 HYDRONIC SPECIALTIES PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SECTION INCLUDES A. Air vents. B. Strainers. C. Flow indicators, controls, meters. 1.2 SUBMITTALS A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Submittal Procedures.” B. Product Data: Provide product data for manufactured products and assemblies required for this project. Include component sizes, rough-in requirements, service sizes, and finishes. Include product description, model and dimensions. C. Submit inspection certificates for pressure vessels from authority having jurisdiction. D. Manufacturer's Installation Instructions: Indicate hanging and support methods, joining procedures. 1.3 PROJECT RECORD DOCUMENTS A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Closeout Procedures.” 1.4 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE DATA A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Operation and Maintenance Data.” B. Maintenance Data: Include installation instructions, assembly views, lubrication instructions, and replacement parts list. 1.5 QUALIFICATIONS A. Manufacturer: Company specializing in manufacturing the Products specified in this Section with minimum 3 years’ experience. 1.6 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Deliver, store, protect and handle products to site under provisions of Division 01 Section “Product Requirements.” B. Accept valves on site in shipping containers with labeling in place. Inspect for damage. HYDRONIC SPECIALTIES 232118 -1 C. Provide temporary protective coating on cast iron and steel valves. D. Provide temporary end caps and closures on piping and fittings. Maintain in place until installation. E. Protect piping systems from entry of foreign materials by temporary covers, completing sections of the work, and isolating parts of completed system. 1.7 AIR VENTS A. Manual Type: Short vertical sections of 2 inch (50 mm) diameter pipe to form air chamber, with 1/8 inch (3 mm) brass needle valve at top of chamber. B. Float Type: 1. Manufacturers: a. Bell & Gossett. b. Caleffi. c. Taco. d. Thrush. e. Wheatley. 2. Brass or semi-steel body, copper, polypropylene, or solid non-metallic float, stainless steel valve and valve seat; suitable for system operating temperature and pressure; with isolating valve. C. Washer Type: 1. Manufacturers: a. Bell & Gossett. b. Caleffi. c. Taco. 2. Brass with hydroscopic fiber discs, vent ports, adjustable cap for manual shut-off, and integral spring loaded ball check valve. 1.8 STRAINERS A. Manufacturers: 1. Sarco. 2. Armstrong. HYDRONIC SPECIALTIES 232118 -2 3. Barnes and Jones. 4. Bell & Gossett. 5. Flo-Fab. 6. Keckley Co. 7. Muesco. 8. Wheatley. B. Size 2 inch (50 mm) and Under: Screwed brass or iron body for 175 psig (1200 kPa) working pressure, Y pattern with 1/32 inch (0.8 mm) stainless steel perforated screen. C. Size 2-1/2 inch (65 mm) to 4 inch (100 mm): Flanged iron body for 175 psig (1200 kPa) working pressure, Y pattern with 3/64 inch (1.2 mm) stainless steel perforated screen. D. Size 5 inch (125 mm) and Larger: Flanged iron body for 175 psig (1200 kPa) working pressure, basket pattern with 1/8 inch (3.2 mm) stainless steel perforated screen. 1.9 BALANCING VALVES AND COMBINATION BALANCING/SHUT-OFF VALVES. A. Manufacturers: 1. Bell & Gossett. 2. Armstrong. 3. Flow Design, Inc. 4. Gerand. 5. Griswold Controls. 6. Mepco. 7. Nexus Valve. 8. Taco. 9. Tour and Andersson. 10. Watts. 11. Wheatley. B. Valves shall conform to one of the following: 1. Fixed-Orifice Manual Balancing Valve: Calibrated, ball type balance valve with HYDRONIC SPECIALTIES 232118 -3 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  precision machined orifice, readout valves equipped with integral check valves and gasketed caps, calibrated nameplate and indicating pointer with memory stop. Readout valves measure the pressure differential across the fixed orifice plate or venturi. Valve shall be designed for positive shut-off. 2. Variable-Orifice Manual Balancing Valve: Cast iron or bronze, globe style, balance valve with handwheel with vernier type ring setting and memory stop, readout valves equipped with integral check valves and gasketed caps. Readout valves measure the pressure differential across the variable opening between valve plug and valve seat. Valve shall be designed for positive shut-off. Drain valve may be furnished with this valve, and if positioned properly may be substituted for the separate drain valve indicated C. Size balancing valves to allow a reading of 2 to 5 ft wg (6 to 15 kPa) pressure drop at design flow rates. Submittals shall include a chart of valve selections, indicating room number, terminal heating device tag, flow rate, pressure drop, and differential pressure reading. D. Insulation: Valves may be furnished with prefabricated thermal insulation. Flame spread reading shall be 25 or less per ASTM E84. R-value shall be 4 hr-sq.ft-F/Btu (0.704 K·m./W) or greater. Install in accordance with Division 23 Section “HVAC Piping Insulation.” 1.10 COMBINATION VALVE ASSEMBLIES A. Manufacturers: 1. Flow Design, Inc. 2. Griswold Controls. 3. Nexus Valve. B. Assemblies combining valves and accessories may be furnished in lieu of the individual components, provided that the components are in the arrangement indicated on the Drawings and conform to the individual Specifications. Examples include combinations of manual balancing valves, unions, pressure/temperature test ports, strainers, manual air vents, flexible hose connections, and shutoff valves. 1.11 INSTALLATION A. Install specialties in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Where large air quantities can accumulate, provide enlarged air collection standpipes. C. Provide manual air vents at system high points and as indicated. D. For automatic air vents in ceiling spaces or other concealed locations, provide vent tubing to nearest drain, and shutoff ball valve upstream of vent to shut the vent off after initial system startup. HYDRONIC SPECIALTIES 232118 -4 E. Provide valved drain and hose connection on strainer blow down connection. F. Provide balancing valves on water outlet from terminal heating and cooling units such as radiation, unit heaters, and fan coil units. G. Ensure that balancing valves are installed with minimum upstream length of straight pipe as recommended by the manufacturer. H. Ensure that balancing valves are installed with the readout valves fully accessible, including space required for insertion of metering probes. I. Standard details for heating and cooling coils are based on single coil arrangements. For heating and cooling coils that are supplied in a split coil arrangement, with two or more individual coils, provide additional piping and balancing valves at each coil to ensure that flow through each coil is proportional to the percentage of total coil face area that the coil occupies. J. Install combination valve assemblies to account for small offsets between coils connections and hard pipe connections. Assemblies shall not be installed in a manner that forms bends of more than 90 degrees total. END OF SECTION 232118 HYDRONIC SPECIALTIES 232118 -5 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  SECTION 232123 HYDRONIC PUMPS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SECTION INCLUDES A. In-line circulators. B. Vertical in-line pumps. 1.2 RELATED SECTIONS A. Division 23 Section “Common Motor Requirements for HVAC Equipment.” B. Division 23 Section “HVAC Piping Insulation.” C. Division 23 Section “Hydronic Piping.” D. Division 23 Section “Hydronic Specialties” E. Division 26 “Electrical” Electrical characteristics and wiring connections. 1.3 REFERENCES A. UL 778 -Motor Operated Water Pumps. B. NFPA 70 -National Electrical Code. 1.4 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. Ensure pumps operate at specified system fluid temperatures without vapor binding and cavitation, are non-overloading throughout the entire operating range in parallel or individual operation, and operate within 25 percent of midpoint of published maximum efficiency curve. 1.5 SUBMITTALS A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Submittal Procedures.” B. Product Data: Provide certified pump curves showing performance characteristics with pump and system operating point plotted. Include NPSH curve when applicable. Include electrical characteristics and connection requirements. C. Manufacturer's Installation Instructions: Indicate hanging and support requirements and recommendations. HYDRONIC PUMPS 232123 -1 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  1.6 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE DATA A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Operation and Maintenance Data.” B. Operation and Maintenance Data: Include installation instructions, assembly views, lubrication instructions, and replacement parts list. 1.7 QUALIFICATIONS A. Manufacturer: Company specializing in manufacturing, assembly, and field performance of pumps with minimum 3 years’ experience. 1.8 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS A. Products Requiring Electrical Connection: Listed and classified by UL as suitable for the purpose specified and indicated. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 MANUFACTURERS A. Pumps, General: 1. Taco. 2. Armstrong. 3. Bell & Gossett. 4. Grundfos. B. Cartridge Circulators with Integral Speed Controller: 1. Grundfos. C. No Substitutions. 2.2 GENERAL A. Statically and dynamically balance rotating parts. B. Construction shall permit complete servicing without breaking piping or motor connections. C. Pumps shall operate at 1750 rpm unless indicated or specified otherwise. D. Pump connections shall be flanged. E. Wetted parts shall be compatible with circulated fluid. HYDRONIC PUMPS 232123 -2 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  2.3 CARTRIDGE CIRCULATORS A. Type: Cartridge type circulator, in-line mounting, for 125 psig (862 kPa) maximum working pressure, 230 degrees F (110 degrees C) maximum water temperature. B. Casing: Cast iron with flanged pump connections. C. Impeller: Non-Metallic D. Shaft: Carbon E. Bearings: Ceramic F. Motor: Impedance protected, single speed, permanent split capacitor. 2.4 IN-LINE CIRCULATORS A. Type: Horizontal shaft, single stage, direct connected, with resiliently mounted motor for in-line mounting, oil lubricated, for 175 psig (1200 kPa) maximum working pressure. B. Casing: Cast iron, with flanged pump connections. C. Impeller: Cadmium plated steel, stamped brass or cast bronze, keyed to shaft. D. Bearings: 2 oil lubricated bronze sleeves. E. Shaft: Alloy or stainless steel with copper or bronze sleeve, integral thrust collar. F. Seal: Carbon rotating against a stationary ceramic seat, 225 degrees F (107 degrees C) maximum continuous operating temperature. G. Drive: Flexible coupling. 2.5 VERTICAL IN-LINE PUMPS A. Type: Vertical, single stage, close coupled, radially or horizontally split casing, for in-line mounting, for 175 psig (1200 kPa) working pressure. B. Casing: Cast iron, with suction and discharge gage port, casing wear ring, seal flush connection, drain plug, flanged suction and discharge. C. Impeller: Bronze, fully enclosed, keyed directly to motor shaft or extension. D. Shaft: Carbon steel with stainless steel impeller cap screw or nut and bronze sleeve. E. Seal: Carbon rotating against a stationary ceramic seat, 225 degrees F (107 degrees C) maximum continuous operating temperature. HYDRONIC PUMPS 232123 -3 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 PREPARATION A. Verify that electric power is available and of the correct characteristics. 3.2 INSTALLATION A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Provide access space around pumps for service. Provide no less than minimum as recommended by manufacturer. C. Decrease piping from line size with long radius reducing elbows or reducers. D. Pump inlet conditions shall be as recommended by the pump manufacturer to eliminate system effects. 1. Provide suction diffusers where indicated. Suction diffusers shall have adequate space provided for strainer removal. Remove fine-mesh start-up strainers after system startup, and hang adjacent to the pump for Architect/Engineer’s approval. 2. Where suction diffusers are not indicated, provide proper straight lengths of inlet piping and long-radius elbows at pump inlets. E. Support piping adjacent to pump such that no weight is carried on pump casings. Provide necessary brackets or hanger supports as required to relieve the stress on the pumps and piping. F. Provide line sized shut-off valve and strainer on pump suction, and properly sized soft seat check valve and balancing/flow-measuring/shutoff valve on pump discharge. G. Install pumps with a pressure gauge piped to suction and discharge, with shutoff valves. H. Provide air cock and drain connections on horizontal pump casings. I. Lubricate pumps before start-up. J. Provide labor and materials required to ensure that pump impellers are adequately sized to provide flow rates as indicated. This shall include, but not be limited to, trimming impellers. END OF SECTION 232123 HYDRONIC PUMPS 232123 -4 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  SECTION 232500 HVAC WATER TREATMENT PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SECTION INCLUDES A. Cleaning of piping systems. B. Chemical feeder equipment. C. Chemical treatment. 1.2 PRODUCTS FURNISHED BUT NOT INSTALLED UNDER THIS SECTION A. Division 23 Section “Hydronic Piping”: Placement of water coupon rack, by-pass (pot) feeder. 1.3 PRODUCTS INSTALLED BUT NOT FURNISHED UNDER THIS SECTION A. Division 01 Section “Summary”: Owner-furnished treatment equipment and chemicals. 1.4 RELATED SECTIONS A. Division 23 Section “Instrumentation and Controls For Mechanical Systems.” B. Division 26 “Electrical”: Electrical characteristics and wiring connections. 1.5 REFERENCES A. NFPA 70 -National Electrical Code. 1.6 SUBMITTALS A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Submittal Procedures.” B. Product Data: Provide chemical treatment materials, chemicals, and equipment including electrical characteristics and connection requirements. C. Manufacturer's Field Reports: Indicate start-up of treatment systems when completed and operating properly. Indicate analysis of system water after cleaning and after treatment. D. Submit certificate of compliance from authority having jurisdiction indicating approval of chemicals and their proposed disposal. 1.7 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE DATA A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Operation and Maintenance Data.” HVAC WATER TREATMENT 232500 -1 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  B. Operation and Maintenance Data: Include data on chemical feed pumps, agitators, and other equipment including spare parts lists, procedures, and treatment programs. Include step by step instructions on test procedures including target concentrations. 1.8 QUALIFICATIONS A. Manufacturer: Company specializing in manufacturing the products specified in this Section with minimum 3 years’ experience. Company shall have local representatives with water analysis laboratories and full time service personnel. B. Installer: Company specializing in performing the work of this Section with minimum 3 years’ experience and approved by manufacturer. 1.9 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS A. Conform to applicable code for addition of non-potable chemicals to building mechanical systems, and for discharge to public sewage systems. B. Products Requiring Electrical Connection: Listed and classified by UL as suitable for the purpose specified and indicated. 1.10 MAINTENANCE SERVICE A. Furnish service and maintenance of treatment systems for 1-year from Date of Substantial Completion. B. Provide monthly technical service visits to perform field inspections and make water analysis on site. Detail findings in writing on proper practices, chemical treating requirements, and corrective actions needed. Submit 2 copies of field service report after each visit. C. Provide laboratory and technical assistance services during this maintenance period. D. Include 2-hour training course for Owner’s operating personnel, instructing them on installation, care, maintenance, testing, and operation of water treatment systems. Schedule the course at Owner’s convenience after start-up of systems. E. Provide on-site inspections of equipment during scheduled or emergency shutdown to properly evaluate success of water treatment program, and make recommendations in writing based upon these inspections. 1.11 MAINTENANCE MATERIALS A. Provide maintenance materials under provisions of Division 01 Section “Product Requirements.” B. Provide sufficient chemicals for treatment and testing during warranty period. HVAC WATER TREATMENT 232500 -2 PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 MANUFACTURERS A. Chemical Treatment Systems Products, and Services: 1. Barclay Water Management, Inc., Watertown, MA office. 2. Nalco Company, Windham, ME office. B. Chemical Treatment Products: 1. Nu-Calgon. 2. Culligan. 3. H-O-H Water Technology, Inc. 4. Wesco Chemicals, Inc. 2.2 MATERIALS A. System Cleaner: 1. Liquid alkaline compound with emulsifying agents and detergents to remove grease and petroleum products. 2. Biocide; chlorine release agents such as sodium hypochlorite or calcium hypochlorite, or microbiocides such as quarternary ammonia compounds, tributyl tin oxide, methylene bis (thiocyanate), or isothiazolones. B. Closed System Treatment (Water): 1. Sequestering agent to reduce deposits and adjust pH; polyphosphate. 2. Corrosion inhibitors; liquid boron-nitrite, sodium nitrite and borax, sodium totyltriazole, low molecular weight polymers, phosphonates, sodium molybdate, or sulphites. 3. Conductivity enhancers; phosphates or phosphonates. 2.3 BY-PASS (POT) FEEDER A. Manufacturers: 1. Neptune Chemical Pump Co.: Model DBF-5HP. 2. General Treatment Products, Inc.: Model DB5-QC-AR. 3. Griswold Water Systems: Model DB-5-GE-CS-Z-230. HVAC WATER TREATMENT 232500 -3 4. Wheatley -a division of Global Flow Products: Model VFT-005-0. 5. No substitutions. B. 5.0 gal (18.9 l), with quick opening cap (coarse threaded or Victaulic grooved coupling type), domed (convex) top and bottom, for working pressure of 200 psig (1370 kPa) at 200 degrees F (93 degrees C), fittings as required for piping configuration indicated on the Drawings, minimum of 3/4 inch (19 mm) FPT inlet, outlet, and bottom drain. C. Provide fitting for air vent ball valve, either on the feeder or on piping, to allow release of pressure before opening the cap. D. Plug any unused openings. E. Open fill funnel is not desired. If a fill funnel is provided, provide a lockable ball valve, and padlock with 3 keys, to prevent tampering. If more than one lock is provided, they shall be keyed alike. Furnish keys to the Owner. F. Install above the floor with legs or pedestal. For feeders which don’t have integral legs or pedestal, provide additional support or concrete housekeeping pad. 2.4 DRIP FEEDER A. Plastic reservoir with coil of capillary tubing with probe, weight, charging syringe, and clip. 2.5 SOLUTION METERING PUMP A. Manufacturers: 1. Milton Roy – LMI Pumps. 2. Neptune. 3. Pulsafeeder, Inc. 4. Stenner Pump Co. 5. Walchem. B. Positive displacement, diaphragm pump with adjustable flow rate, thermoplastic construction, continuous-duty fully enclosed electric motor and drive, and built-in relief valve. C. Electrical Characteristics: Suitable for 15 or 20 amp circuit, 120V/1ph/60Hz, with cord and 3-prong plug for standard receptacle. 2.6 SOLUTION TANKS A. 30-gallon (114-l) capacity, polyethylene, self-supporting, one-gallon (3.8-l) graduated markings; molded fiberglass cover with recess for mounting pump, agitator (if HVAC WATER TREATMENT 232500 -4 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  required), and liquid level switch. 2.7 AGITATOR A. Totally enclosed electric motor, stainless steel clamp and motor mount, Type 316 stainless steel propeller. B. Electrical Characteristics: Suitable for 15 or 20 amp circuit, 120V/1ph/60Hz, with cord and 3-prong plug for standard receptacle. 2.8 LIQUID LEVEL SWITCH A. Polypropylene housing with integrally mounted PVC air trap, receptacles for connection to metering pump, and low level alarm. B. Electrical Characteristics: 120V/1ph/60Hz. 2.9 CONDUCTIVITY CONTROLLER A. Packaged monitor controller with solid state circuiting, five percent accuracy, linear dial adjustment, built-in calibration switch, on-off switch and light, control function light, output to control circuit and recorder. B. Electrical Characteristics: 120V/1ph/60Hz. 2.10 WATER METER A. Displacement type cold water meter with sealed, tamper-proof magnetic drive, impulse contact register, single pole, double throw dry contact switch. B. Electrical Characteristics: 120V/1ph/60Hz. 2.11 SOLENOID VALVES A. Forged brass body globe pattern, normally open or closed as required, general purpose solenoid enclosure, and continuous duty coil. B. Electrical Characteristics: 120V/1ph/60Hz. 2.12 TIMERS A. Electronic timers, infinitely adjustable over full range, 150 second and five minute range, mounted together in cabinet with hands-off-automatic switches and status lights. B. Electrical Characteristics: Suitable for 15 or 20 amp circuit, 120V/1ph/60Hz, with cord and 3-prong plug for standard receptacle. 2.13 TEST EQUIPMENT A. Provide white enamel test cabinet with local and fluorescent light, capable of accommodating 4 – 10 ml zeroing titrating burettes and associated reagents. HVAC WATER TREATMENT 232500 -5 B. Provide the Following Test Kits (verify suitability for the installed hot water piping systems): 1. Alkalinity titration test kit. 2. Chloride titration test kit. 3. Sulphite titration test kit. 4. Total hardness titration test kit. 5. Low phosphate test kit. 6. Conductivity bridge, range 0 -10,000 microhms. 7. Creosol red pH slide complete with reagent. 8. Portable electronic conductivity meter. 9. High nitrite test kit. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 PREPARATION A. Systems shall be operational, filled, started, and vented prior to cleaning. Use water meter to record capacity in each system. B. Place terminal control valves in open position during cleaning. C. Verify that electric power is available and of the correct characteristics. 3.2 CLEANING SEQUENCE A. Concentration: 1. As recommended by manufacturer. 2. 1 pound per 100 gallons (1 kg per 1000 L) of water contained in the system. 3. 1 pound per 100 gallons (1 kg per 1000 L) of water for hot systems and 1 pound per 50 gallons (1 kg per 500 L) of water for cold systems. B. Hot Water Heating Systems: 1. Apply heat while circulating, slowly raising temperature to 160 degrees F (71 degrees C) and maintain for 12 hours minimum. 2. Remove heat and circulate to 100 degrees F (37.8 degrees C) or less; drain systems as quickly as possible and refill with clean water. HVAC WATER TREATMENT 232500 -6 3. Circulate for 6 hours at design temperatures, then drain. 4. Refill with clean water and repeat until system cleaner is removed. C. Use neutralizer agents on recommendation of system cleaner supplier and approval of Architect/Engineer. D. Flush open systems and glycol filled closed systems with clean water for one hour minimum. Drain completely and refill. E. Remove, clean, and replace strainer screens. F. Inspect, remove sludge, and flush low points with clean water after cleaning process is completed. Include disassembly of components as required. 3.3 INSTALLATION A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. 3.4 CLOSED SYSTEM TREATMENT A. Provide one bypass feeder on each system. Install isolating and drain valves and necessary piping. Install around balancing valve downstream of circulating pumps unless indicated otherwise. B. Introduce closed system treatment through bypass feeder when required or indicated by test. END OF SECTION 232500 HVAC WATER TREATMENT 232500 -7 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  SECTION 233113 METAL DUCTS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SECTION INCLUDES A. Metal Ductwork. B. Nonmetal Ductwork. C. Casing and Plenums. D. Hood Ductwork. 1.2 PRODUCTS INSTALLED BUT NOT FURNISHED UNDER THIS SECTION A. Division 23 Sensors and airflow measuring stations furnished under Division 23 Section “Instrumentation and Control for Mechanical Systems”; gauges and meters. B. Division 26 – Electrical: Smoke detectors. 1.3 RELATED SECTIONS A. Division 23 Section “Testing, Adjusting and Balancing for HVAC.” B. Division 23 Section “Hangers and Supports for HVAC Piping and Equipment”: Sleeves. C. Division 23 Section “Duct Insulation”: External insulation and duct liner. D. Division 23 Section “Air Duct Accessories” E. Division 23 Section “Air Outlets and Inlets.” 1.4 REFERENCES A. ASTM A 36 -Structural Steel. B. ASTM A 90 -Standard Test Method for Weight of Coating on Iron and Steel Articles with Zinc or Zinc-Alloy Coatings. C. ASTM A 167 -Stainless and Heat-Resisting Chromium-Nickel Steel Plate, Sheet, and Strip. D. ASTM A 480 -General Requirements for Flat-Rolled Stainless and Heat-Resisting Steel Plate, Sheet, and Strip. E. ASTM A 568 -Steel, Sheet, Carbon, Structural, and High-Strength, Low-Alloy, Hot-Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  Rolled and Cold-Rolled. F. ASTM A 653 -Steel Sheet, Zinc-Coated (Galvanized) or Zinc-Iron Alloy-Coated (Galvannealed) by the Hot-Dip Process. G. ASTM A 1008 -Steel, Sheet, Cold-Rolled, Carbon, Structural, High-Strength Low-Alloy, High-Strength Low-Alloy with Improved Formability, Solution Hardened, and Bake Hardenable. H. ASTM A 1011 -Steel, Sheet and Strip, Hot-Rolled, Carbon, Structural, High-Strength Low-Alloy, High-Strength Low-Alloy with Improved Formability, and Ultra-High Strength. I. AWS D9.1 -Welding of Sheet Metal. J. NFPA 90A -Installation of Air Conditioning and Ventilating Systems. K. NFPA 90B -Installation of Warm Air Heating and Air Conditioning Systems. L. SMACNA -HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible (SMACNA HVACDCS). M. UL 181 -Factory-Made Air Ducts and Connectors. 1.5 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. No variation of duct configuration or sizes is permitted except by written permission from the Architect. Size proposed substitutions of round ducts in place of rectangular ducts in accordance with ASHRAE table of equivalent rectangular and round ducts. 1.6 SUBMITTALS A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Submittal Procedures”. B. Shop Drawings: Indicate duct fittings, particulars such as gauges, sizes, welds, and configuration. Submit prior to start of work. C. Product Data: Provide data for duct materials, duct liner and duct connectors. D. Test Reports: Submit testing apparatus, procedures, and preliminary forms prior to performing tests. On final reports, indicate pressure tests performed. Include date, section tested, test pressure, and leakage rate, following SMACNA HVAC Air Duct Leakage Test Manual. 1.7 PROJECT RECORD DOCUMENTS A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Closeout Procedures.” B. Record actual locations of ducts and duct fittings. Record changes in fitting location and type. Indicate additional fittings used. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  1.8 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Perform Work in accordance with SMACNA HVAC DCS. 1.9 QUALIFICATIONS A. Manufacturer: Company specializing in manufacturing the Products specified in this Section with minimum 3 years’ experience. B. Installer: Company specializing in performing the work of this Section with minimum 3 years’ experience. 1.10 ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS A. Do not install duct sealants when temperatures are less than those recommended by sealant manufacturers. B. Maintain temperatures during and after installation of duct sealants. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 ACCEPTABLE MANUFACTURERS A. Flexible Ducts: 1. Flexible Technologies Group -Thermaflex product line. 2. Buckley Associates -Flexmaster Triple-Lock Buck Duct product line. 3. No substitutions. B. Plastic Drawbands: 1. Panduit. 2. Thomas and Betts. 3. Tyton. C. Tape for Flexible Ducts: 1. Ideal Tape Co., division of American Biltrite Inc. 2. 3M Company. 3. Nashua Tape Products, division of Berry Plastics Corp. 4. Venture Tape Corporation. 5. No substitutions. D. Manufactured Ductwork -Round and Flat Oval: 1. McGill AirFlow LLC, a subsidiary of United McGill Corporation. 2. Aero Heating & Ventilating, Inc.; Portland, ME. 3. Air Purchases, Inc.; Manchester, NH – spiral duct lengths. 4. Atlantic Air Products LLC; Bow, NH. 5. Central City Sheet Metal; Brewer, Caribou, and Gorham, ME. 6. Hahnel Brothers; Bangor and Lewiston, ME. 7. Hranec Corporation; Uniontown, PA. 8. Lindab, Inc. – duct fittings only. 9. Macy Industries, Inc.; Hookset, NH. 10. Monroe Metal Mfg. Inc.; Monroe, NC. 11. Northeastern Sheet Metal Inc.; Goffstown, NH. 12. Semco Inc., division of the Flakt Woods Group. 13. S.G. Torrice Co.; Wilmington, MA – spiral duct lengths. 14. Sheet Metal Connectors Inc.; Minneapolis, MN. 15. Spiral Manufacturing Co. Inc.; Minneapolis, MN. 16. Total Air Supply; Nashua, NH – spiral duct lengths. 17. No substitutions. E. Manufactured Ductwork -Transverse Duct Connection System: 1. Ductmate. 2. HFC Enterprises; Baldwin Park, CA – Dura Flange product line, for round and flat oval ducts only. F. Sealants: 1. Hardcast, a division of Carlisle Corporation. 2. 3M Company. 3. Ductmate. 4. Foster. 5. McGill AirSeal LLC, a subsidiary of United McGill Corporation. 6. Mon-Eco Industries, Inc -Eco product line. 7. Polymer Adhesive Sealant Systems. 2.2 MATERIALS A. Galvanized Steel Ducts: 1. Steel sheet metal components of galvanized ductwork in this Specification Section shall be galvanized steel sheet, lock-forming quality, having G60 or heavier zinc coating (G90 minimum for outdoor or moist applications) conforming to ASTM A653 rating system and tested in accordance with ASTM A90. 2. Provide paint-grip exterior surfaces for exposed ducts, where available. 3. Sheet metal gauge shall be not less than 26 gauge (0.56 mm). B. Stainless Steel Ducts: ASTM A167, Type 304 or 316. Material for exposed ducts shall have a finish at least equal to Mill Polished No. 4. 2.3 FLEXIBLE DUCTS A. Insulated Flexible Ducts: 1. Semi-Rigid Flexible Aluminum Ductwork: a. Flexmaster Triple-Lock Buck Duct -Insulated. b. Triple lock mechanical joint aluminum flex duct, constructed entirely without the use of adhesive. c. Fiberglass insulation and fire-retardant polyethylene vapor retarder film. d. Pressure Rating: Positive pressure 12 in. WG (2988 Pa) for all sizes. Negative pressure 12 in. WG (2988 Pa) for sizes thru 16 in. (406 mm) diameter, 8 in. WG (1993 Pa) for sizes 18 and 20 in. (457 and 508 mm) diameter. e. Maximum Velocity: 5500 fpm (27.9 m/sec). f. Inside bend radius: Minimum one diameter. g. Temperature Range: -40 to 250 degrees F (-40 to 121 degrees C). h. UL 181, Class 0 air duct. i. Meets NFPA 90A and 90B standards. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  2. Fabric-Core Flexible Ductwork: a. Thermaflex Model M-KC. b. Greenguard certified. c. UL 181, Class 1, heavy fiberglass cloth fabric supported by helically wound spring steel wire; fiberglass insulation; reinforced metalized vapor barrier film. d. Pressure Rating: 10 inches WG (2.5 kPa) positive and 2.0 inches WG (500 Pa) negative. e. Maximum Velocity: 6000 fpm (30.4 m/sec). f. Temperature Range: -20 to 250 degrees F (-28 to 121 degrees C). B. Non-Insulated Flexible Ducts: 1. Semi-Rigid Flexible Aluminum Ductwork: a. Flexmaster Triple-Lock Buck Duct -Bare. b. Triple lock mechanical joint aluminum flex duct, constructed entirely without the use of adhesive. c. Pressure Rating: 12 inches WG (2988 Pa) positive for all sizes, 12 inches WG (2988 Pa) negative for sizes thru 16 in. diameter (406 mm), 8 inches WG (1992 Pa) negative for sizes 18 in. (457 mm) and 20 in. (508 mm) diameter. d. Maximum Velocity: 5500 fpm (27.9 m/sec). e. Inside bend radius: Minimum one diameter. f. Temperature Range: -40 to 250 degrees F (-40 to 121 degrees C). g. UL 181, Class 0 air duct. h. Meets NFPA 90A and 90B standards. C. Return and Exhaust: Use either semi-rigid flexible aluminum type (insulated or bare), or fabric-core type (insulated). Non-insulated fabric-core type does not have adequate negative pressure rating. 2.4 ACCESSORIES A. Drawbands for Flexible Ducts: 1. Stainless Steel: 1/2 inch (13 mm) wide with screw-driven worm gear. 2. Plastic: Panduit PLT5H or PLT8H; Thomas and Betts Dukt-Rap, VAL-26-50, or VAL-275X-25; or Tyton T150L or LX. Install with manufacturer’s lever-action tightening tool. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  B. Tape for Flexible Ducts: Ideal-Seal 587A/B, UL 181B-FX listed, aluminum foil with pressure-sensitive acrylic adhesive, -20 to 250 degrees F (-28 to 121 degrees C) temperature range, 25.0 lb/in. width (109.4 N/25.4 mm width) tensile strength. C. Fasteners: Rivets, bolts, or sheet metal screws. D. Sealants: See Duct Sealant portion of this Specification. E. Hanger Rod: ASTM A36; galvanized steel; threaded both ends, threaded one end, or continuously threaded. F. Wire Rope Hanging System: At the Contractor’s option, Ductmate Industries’ Clutcher hanger system may be used with Ductmate wire rope (no substitutions). System use and installation shall conform with manufacturer’s requirements. System shall not be painted or otherwise coated. System shall not be used in corrosive environments. 2.5 DUCTWORK FABRICATION A. Fabricate and support in accordance with SMACNA HVAC DCS, as specified or as indicated on the drawings. Provide duct material, gauges, reinforcing, and sealing for operating pressures indicated. B. SMACNA Duct Construction Manuals: 1. The SMACNA recommendations shall be considered as mandatory requirements. 2. Substitute the word “shall” for the word “should” in these manuals. 3. Where the Contract Specifications differ from SMACNA recommendations, the more stringent requirements (as determined by the Architect) shall take precedence. 4. Details on the Contract Drawings take precedence over SMACNA standards. C. Sheet metal shall be galvanized steel as specified in Part 2 paragraph “Materials” in this Section, unless otherwise indicated or specified. D. Construct Tees, bends, and elbows with radius of not less than 1-1/2 times width of duct on centerline. 1. Where space is too restricted for full-radius elbows, provide mitered (square.throat) elbows with single wall turning vanes. Do not use air foil turning vanes. 2. Mitered elbows in round or flat-oval ductwork shall be factory-manufactured. 3. Radiused elbows with throat radius 1/2 times width of duct (centerline radius 1 width of duct) may be used instead of mitered elbows, but only where space is too restricted for full radius. 4. Fittings not conforming to these requirements will be ordered removed and replaced with proper fittings. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  E. Increase duct sizes gradually, not exceeding 15 degrees divergence or convergence (per side) wherever possible; maximum 30 degrees divergence (per side) upstream of equipment and 45 degrees convergence (per side) downstream. F. Fabricate continuously welded round and oval duct fittings two gauges heavier than duct gauges indicated in SMACNA Standard. Joints shall be minimum 4 inch (100 mm) cemented slip joint, brazed or electric welded. Prime coat welded joints. G. Provide standard 45 degree lateral wye takeoffs unless otherwise indicated where 90 degree conical tee connections may be used. H. Longitudinal locks or seams known as “button-punch-snap-lock” and other “snap-lock” types will not be permitted in rectangular duct. Snap-lock longitudinal seams may be used on round ducts up to 8 inches diameter, with screws provided to secure the seams at 24 inches (609 mm) on center maximum spacing. I. Exposed Ducts: Select and handle materials with care for a neat appearance. Joint connections on round and flat oval ducts shall be sleeve or flanged type; drawbands are not acceptable. 2.6 MANUFACTURED DUCTWORK AND FITTINGS A. Manufactured ductwork and fittings listed below are acceptable alternatives to standard ductwork systems. For exposed round and flat oval ductwork, factory-manufactured ductwork and fittings are required. B. Manufacture in accordance with SMACNA HVAC DCS, and as specified or as indicated on the drawings. Provide duct material, gauges, reinforcing, and sealing for operating pressures indicated. C. Exposed Round and Flat Oval Ductwork: Shall be manufactured ductwork by one of the listed manufacturers. 1. Spiral Ductwork Acceptable Products: a. McGill Airflow: Standard Uni-Seal product line (smooth surface between spiral lockseams) or Uni-Rib product line (one standing seam reinforcement between each pair of spiral lockseams). b. Monroe Metal Inc.: Standard spiral product line (smooth surface between spiral lockseams). V-Rib product line is not allowed. c. Other Manufacturers: Standard spiral product line (smooth surface between spiral lockseams). d. Ductwork and fittings shall be products of a single manufacturer. D. Exposed Ducts: 1. Select and handle materials with care for a neat appearance. 2. Joint connections on round and flat oval ducts shall be sleeve or flanged type; drawbands are not acceptable. Joint connections on flat oval ducts 42 inches (1.07 m) and wider shall be flanged type to ensure tight fit and good appearance. 3. Provide exterior reinforcing only where required, with prior approval from the Architect. 4. External reinforcement of flat-oval ducts shall be full-perimeter angle rings. Straight angles along flat sides only are not allowed. E. Galvanized and stainless steel sheet metal used in fabrication shall be not less than 26 gauge (0.551 mm) thickness. This requirement supersedes SMACNA requirements. F. Round and Flat Oval Duct and Fittings: 1. Shall be suitable for at least 4 in. WG (996 Pa) positive pressure and 2 in. WG (498 Pa) negative pressure in accordance with SMACNA HVACDCS standards. This is a minimum; provide higher ratings where required. 2. Fittings shall be fabricated of sheet metal at least one gauge heavier than straight duct of the same size. 3. Fittings shall be factory-sealed so that no field sealing of joints between gores or segments is required. Acceptable methods of construction are fully welded, spot-welded with inner sealant, or standing-seam crimped joints. G. Radiused Elbows in Round and Flat Oval: 1. In exposed ductwork shall be non-adjustable type, factory-sealed. 2. In concealed ductwork may be adjustable type, with full long radius as detailed on the Drawings. Short-radius elbows are not allowed. 3. Shall be constructed of the following minimum number of segments or gores: 90.degree: 4 gores; 60-degree: 3 gores; 45-degree: 3 gores; 30-degree: 2 gores; 22-1/2-degree: 2 gores. 4. 1-piece stamped elbows are acceptable up to 12 inches (305 mm) diameter. Pleated elbows are acceptable up to 10 inches (254 mm) diameter. H. Mitered Elbows in Round and Flat Oval: 1. Available in both 90-degree and 45-degree elbows. 2. Shall have minimum number of welded single-wall vanes as follows (size is duct width in plane of bend): a. 3to 9inch(76 to 229 mm): 2. b. 10 to 14 inch (254 to 356 mm): 3. c. 15 to 19 inch (381 to 483 mm): 4. d. 20 to 60 inch (508 to 1524 mm): 5. e. Larger Sizes: 12-inch (305 mm) maximum spacing. I. Inner tie-rod reinforcement is not allowed. Increase duct sheet metal gauge or external reinforcement as required. J. Flat Oval Ducts: Machine made from round spiral lockseam duct. K. Double Wall Insulated Flat Oval Ducts: Machine made from round spiral lockseam duct, galvanized steel outer wall, 1 inch (25 mm) thick fiberglass insulation, perforated galvanized steel inner wall; fittings manufactured with solid inner wall. Joint connections shall be flanged type; sleeve type or drawbands are not acceptable. L. Double Wall Insulated Round Ducts: Round spiral lockseam duct with galvanized steel outer wall, 1 inch (25 mm) thick fiberglass insulation, perforated galvanized steel inner wall; fittings with solid inner wall. M. Transverse Duct Connection System: SMACNA “F” rated or SMACNA “J” rated rigidity class connection, interlocking angle and duct edge connection system with sealant, gasket, cleats, and corner clips. Product shall be Ductmate factory-manufactured connectors, or field-formed flanges using a specialized machine. 2.7 CASINGS A. Fabricate casings in accordance with SMACNA HVACDCS and construct for operating pressures indicated. B. Mount floor mounted casings on 4 inch (100 mm) high concrete curbs. At floor, rivet panels on 8 inch (200 mm) centers to angles. Where floors are acoustically insulated, provide liner of 18 gauge (1.20 mm) galvanized expanded metal mesh supported at 12 inch (300 mm) centers, turned up 12 inches (300 mm) at sides with sheet metal shields. C. Reinforce door frames with steel angles tied to horizontal and vertical plenum supporting angles. Install hinged access doors where indicated or required for access to equipment for cleaning and inspection. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  D. Fabricate acoustic casings with reinforcing turned inward. Provide 16 gauge (1.50 mm) back facing and 22 gauge (0.80 mm) perforated front facing with 3/32 inch (2.4 mm) diameter holes on 5/32 inch (4 mm) centers. Construct panels 3 inches (75 mm) thick packed with 4.5 lb/cu ft (72 kg/cu m) minimum glass fiber media, on inverted channels of 16 gauge (1.50 mm). 2.8 HOOD EXHAUST DUCTWORK A. Fabricate in accordance with SMACNA HVACDCS. B. Construct of type 304 or 316 stainless steel, or aluminum. 2.9 PRESSURE CLASSIFICATION A. Ratings as indicated on the Drawings or as specified. See Ductwork Pressure Class Schedule in Part 3 of this Section. B. If no ratings are indicated, ductwork shall be rated for the external static pressure of the system plus 25 percent. 1. If 4 dampers (of any type) or fewer can isolate a duct system, that portion of the system shall be rated for the shut-off pressure of the system fans. 2.10 DUCT SEALING A. Seal ductwork as outlined in the SMACNA HVAC DCS. Seal ductwork to a minimum of class A (transverse joints, longitudinal seams, and duct wall penetrations), regardless of pressure class. B. Seal ductwork systems as required to ensure that maximum duct leakage does not exceed that allowed by the latest edition of the SMACNA HVAC Air Duct Leakage Test Manual. Allow sealant to dry in accordance with manufacturer’s requirements of time and environmental conditions before ductwork systems are pressurized. C. Existing Ductwork: Seal existing ductwork served by, and/or connected to, the equipment furnished under Division 23, and ductwork as indicated on the Drawings. Contractor shall be responsible to field-verify quantities and sizes. Provide access to existing ductwork as required for complete sealing. Remove existing finishes and loose existing sealants as required for proper adhesion of sealant. D. Duct sealing materials used shall be non-flammable and non-combustible in both liquid and solid states. E. Seal Pittsburgh hammered lockseams by flooding the joint with sealant prior to assembly. F. Seal exposed ducts by applying mastic-type or gasket-type sealer just before the joint or seam is made; remove excess sealant for a neat appearance. G. Fill (with matching duct material such as sheet metal) any gaps in duct which exceed the recommendations of the sealant manufacturer, and in no case shall liquid or mastic sealant be used to fill gaps or openings which exceed 1/8 inch (3.2 mm) in any direction. Verify that system air pressure acting on a wide gap will not exert enough force to damage or loosen the sealant. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  H. Materials for Sealing: 1. Hardcast: Flex-Grip 550 or Iron-Grip 601 mastic. 2. Hardcast: gypsum-based tape and mastic, waterproof type when used on moist-air exhaust or in humid or outdoor locations. 3. Ductmate: Flanged lateral joints with gaskets. 4. Ductmate: PROseal. 5. Foster: Duct-Fas or Safetee mastic sealant. Duct-Fas is UV resistant and recommended for applications exposed to sunlight. 6. Mon-Eco: Eco-Duct Seal 4450 (red color) or 4452 (grey color). Use grey color where ducts will be unpainted and exposed to public view. 7. Polymer Adhesives Sealant Systems: Airseal No. 11 premium sealant. 2.11 UNIFORMITY OF MATERIALS A. Ductwork accessories, including but not limited to volume dampers, smoke dampers, fire dampers, combination fire/smoke dampers, backdraft dampers and motorized dampers, shall be fabricated of materials that are similar to the ductwork in which they are installed. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 INSTALLATION A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Install components furnished under other Section and Divisions of the Specifications. Such items may include but are not limited to: Sensors and airflow measuring stations furnished under Division 23 Section “Instrumentation and Control for Mechanical Systems”; gauges and meters; and smoke detectors furnished under Division 26 – Electrical. C. Install ducts in accordance with SMACNA HVAC DCS. D. Duct Sizes are inside clear dimensions. For lined ducts, maintain sizes inside lining. E. “Fishmouth” duct connections are not allowed. F. Inner tie-rod reinforcement is not allowed. Increase duct sheet metal gauge or external reinforcement as required. G. Exposed Ducts: 1. Handle with care for a neat appearance. Repair or replace dented or damaged ductwork as required by the Architect. Select hangers for appearance, and to prevent sagging or distortion of duct. 2. Remove labels attached to ducts before receiving paint. H. Provide openings in ductwork where required to accommodate thermometers and controllers. Provide pitot tube openings where required for testing of systems, complete with metal can with spring device or screw to ensure against air leakage. Where openings are provided in insulated ductwork, install insulation material inside a metal ring. I. Locate ducts with sufficient space around equipment to allow normal operating and maintenance activities. J. Use crimp joints with or without bead for joining round duct sizes 8 inch (200 mm) and smaller with crimp in direction of air flow. K. Use double nuts and lock washers on threaded rod supports. Strap hangers shall be minimum 16 gauge (1.50 mm) x 1 inch (25 mm) galvanized straps. Hanger and support components including but not limited to “unistrut” shall be galvanized steel except that where other duct materials are used, the hanger materials shall be compatible and non-corrosive to the duct. Wire hangers are not acceptable. L. Flexible Ducts: 1. Connect diffusers or light troffer boots to low pressure supply ducts directly or with 5 feet (1.5 m) maximum length of flexible duct held in place with strap or clamp. 2. Minimum bend radius shall be one and one half times the duct diameter. Support the bend to maintain this radius. 3. Bends shall not exceed 45 degrees. 4. Connect flexible ducts to metal ducts with 2 turns of duct tape and metal draw bands. Plastic drawbands may be used if they are installed using the band manufacturer’s lever-action tightening tool. On insulated flexible ducts, provide an additional seal of tape and drawband on the insulation’s vapor barrier. M. Set plenum doors 6 to 12 inches (150 to 300 mm) above floor. Arrange door swings so that fan static pressure holds door in closed position. N. During construction, provide temporary closures of metal or taped polyethylene on open ductwork to prevent construction dust from entering ductwork system. Do not start ducted air moving equipment until construction is completed to a stage where airborne construction dust is no longer present. At the time of substantial completion, the entire air distribution system shall be turned over to the Owner clear of construction dust and debris. If the interior surfaces of any ducted air moving equipment or the interior surfaces of any portion of the ductwork distribution system are found, as determined by the Architect, to contain significant construction dust and debris, the entire air distribution system shall be cleaned in accordance with Division 23. If proper precautions are taken to prevent construction dust and debris from entering the ductwork during construction and if the Architect finds all ductwork to be free from such dust and debris, air duct cleaning shall not be required. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  O. For fresh air intake and exhaust plenums connected to louvers or brick or block vents, pitch bottom of plenums down to bottom of louver at minimum 1/4 inch per foot (2 percent). Seal connections and joints on bottom of plenums watertight with mastic. Connect bottom of plenum to top-inside edge of bottom louver blade or waterstop as detailed on the Drawings, to ensure positive drainage P. Install duct-mounted components furnished under other Sections of this Specification, such as smoke dampers, control dampers, control sensors, and smoke detectors. Install with straight lengths of duct as required for proper operation. Provide access at such components as required. Install in accessible locations for maintenance; notify the Architect if a location indicated or selected requires addition of access by other trades. Q. Condensate Hood Ductwork: 1. Seal seams, joints, and penetrations with waterproof sealant. Where possible, avoid longitudinal seams on the bottom side of horizontal ducts. 2. Slope ducts continuously back to the hood to drain, without low points. 3. Where low points are necessary due to field obstructions, provide a fitting of the same material as the duct, with a threaded coupling and a drain ball valve with garden hose connection and cap. 4. Provide non-conductive material between dissimilar metals to inhibit galvanic corrosion. 3.2 REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL KITCHEN HOOD EXHAUST DUCT A. Install commercial kitchen hood exhaust ducts without dips and traps that may hold grease, and sloped a minimum of 2 percent to drain grease back to the hood. B. Install fire-rated access panel assemblies at each change in direction and at maximum intervals of 20 feet in horizontal ducts, and at every floor for vertical ducts, or as indicated on Drawings. C. Do not penetrate fire-rated assemblies except as allowed by applicable building codes and authorities having jurisdiction. D. Ducts Connected to Commercial Kitchen Hoods: Comply with NFPA 96. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  a. Exposed to View: Type 304, stainless-steel sheet, finish. b. Concealed: Type 304, stainless-steel sheet, No. 2D finish Carbon-steel sheet. c. Welded seams and joints. d. Pressure Class: Positive or negative 3-inch wg e. Airtight/Watertight. 3.3 SCHEDULES A. Ductwork Material Schedule AIR SYSTEM MATERIAL Low Pressure Supply Galvanized Steel (Heating Systems) Low Pressure Supply Galvanized Steel (System with Cooling Coils) Medium and High Pressure Supply Galvanized Steel Return and Relief Galvanized Steel General Exhaust Galvanized Steel Outside Air Intake Galvanized Steel Kitchen Hood Exhaust Stainless Steel or Carbon Steel, B. Ductwork Pressure Class Schedule AIR SYSTEM SMACNA PRESSURE CLASS Supply (Heating Systems) 2 inch (500 Pa) Supply (System withCooling Coils) 2 inch (500 Pa) Return and Relief 2 inch (250 Pa) General Exhaust 2 inch (250 Pa) Outside Air Intake 2 inch (250 Pa) Intake and Exhaust 2 inch (250 Pa) Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  Ventilation 2 inch (250 Pa Kitchen Exhaust 3 inch (250 Pa) C. Leakage Class Schedule: DUCT PRESSURE CLASS DUCT TYPE LEAKAGE CLASS Below 3 inch W.G. Rectangular Metal 12 Below 3 inch W.G. Round Metal 6 3 inch W.G. and above Rectangular Metal 6 3 inch W.G. and above Round Metal 3 END OF SECTION 233113 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  SECTION 233300 AIR DUCT ACCESSORIES PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SECTION INCLUDES A. Dampers: 1. Combination Fire and Smoke Dampers. 2. Fire Dampers. 3. Smoke Dampers. 4. Volume Control Dampers. B. Duct Access Doors. C. Duct Test Holes. D. Flexible Duct Connections. E. Roof Curbs. F. Round Duct Branch Taps. G. Turning Vanes. H. Wire Mesh for Screens. 1.2 REFERENCES A. ASTM C423-02a -Standard Test Method for Sound Absorption and Sound Absorption Coefficients by the Reverberation Room Method. B. ASTM E477-99 -Standard Test Method for Measuring Acoustical and Airflow Performance of Duct Liner Materials and Prefabricated Silencers. C. NFPA 90A -Installation of Air Conditioning and Ventilating Systems. D. NFPA 92A -Smoke Control Systems. E. NFPA 70 -National Electrical Code. F. NFPA 96 -Installation of Equipment for the Removal of Smoke and Grease-Laden Vapors from Commercial Cooking Equipment. G. SMACNA -HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible, Third Edition .2005 (HVACDCS). Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  H. SMACNA -Seismic Restraint Manual -Guidelines for Mechanical Systems (SRMGMS). I. UL 33 -Heat Responsive Links for Fire-Protection Service. J. UL 94 -Safety of Flammability of Plastic Materials for Parts in Devices and Appliances Testing. K. UL 555 -Fire Dampers and Ceiling Dampers. L. UL 1995 -Heating and Cooling Systems. 1.3 SUBMITTALS A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Submittal Procedures.” B. Shop Drawings: Indicate for shop fabricated assemblies including volume control dampers, duct access doors and duct test holes. C. Product Data: Provide for shop fabricated assemblies including volume control dampers, duct access doors, duct test holes and hardware used. Include electrical characteristics and connection requirements. D. Manufacturer's Installation Instructions: Indicate for fire dampers and combination fire and smoke dampers. 1.4 PROJECT RECORD DOCUMENTS A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Closeout Procedures.” B. Record actual locations of access doors and test holes. 1.5 QUALIFICATIONS A. Manufacturer: Company specializing in manufacturing the products specified in this Section with minimum 3 years’ experience. 1.6 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS A. Products Requiring Electrical Connection: Listed and classified by Underwriters' Laboratories Inc., as suitable for the purpose specified and indicated. 1.7 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Deliver, store, protect and handle products to site under provisions of Division 01 Section “Product Requirements.” B. Protect dampers from damage to operating linkages and blades. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 GALVANIZED STEEL A. Steel sheet metal components of accessories in this Specification Section shall be galvanized steel sheet, lock-forming quality, having G90 or heavier zinc coating conforming to ASTM A653 rating system and tested in accordance with ASTM A90. Provide paint-grip exterior surfaces for exposed ducts, where available. 2.2 DAMPERS A. Manufacturers: 1. Ruskin. 2. Air Balance, Inc. 3. Arrow. 4. Cesco. 5. Greenheck. 6. NCA. 7. Tamco. 8. Ventex. 9. Vent Products, Inc. 10. No substitutions. B. Combination Fire and Smoke Dampers: 1. Dampers shall be equal to Ruskin FSD60 with airfoil blades. 2. Fabricate in accordance with NFPA 90A, UL 555, UL 555S -4th Edition, and as specified or as indicated on the Drawings. Rated operation shall be 4,000 fpm face velocity and 4 in. w.g. static pressure. Sizes with these ratings are limited; provide multiple sections where necessary. 3. Dampers: UL Leakage Class 1 multiple blade type combination fire/smoke damper, normally open or closed (verify application), automatically operated by electric actuator. 4. Provide sleeve and collar for each damper. Integral sleeves are not acceptable. 5. Multiple Blade Dampers: Fabricate with 16 gage galvanized steel frame and blades, oil-impregnated bronze or stainless steel sleeve bearings and plated steel axles, stainless steel jamb seals. Blade edge seals: Extruded silicone and galvanized steel, mechanically locked to the blade edges. 6. Fire Activation Device: a. “Controlled closure” quick detect heat-actuated release device to prevent duct and HVAC component damage. Instantaneous damper closure through the use of fusible links is unacceptable. b. Devices shall generally close at 165 degrees F (74 degrees C). Provide devices closing at 212 degrees F (100 degrees C) within 50 feet (15.2 m) downstream of heating coils. c. Closure shall conform to the requirements for dynamic-closure type fire dampers, as required by NFPA 90A and the UL test standards. 7. Operators: UL listed and labeled direct-coupled spring-return electric type suitable for 120 volts, single phase, 60 Hz. a. At Contractor’s option, actuator voltage may be 24 VAC; provide power supplies as required. b. Provide end switches to indicate damper position. c. Locate damper operator on exterior of duct and link to damper operating shaft. C. Fire Dampers: 1. Fabricate in accordance with NFPA 90A and UL 555, and as specified or as indicated on the Drawings. 2. Fire Dampers Other Than Ceiling Dampers: a. For systems in which the fan stops immediately and automatically in any fire or smoke alarm condition: 1) Static Fire Dampers: Curtain type dampers, Type B with blades out of the air stream. Galvanized steel with interlocking blades. Provide stainless steel closure springs for horizontal (floor) applications. b. For systems in which the fan does not stop immediately in a fire or smoke alarm condition, requiring the damper to close against airflow, dynamic-closure type dampers are required by NFPA 90A: 1) Fire dampers shall be of the dynamic closure type, shall have been successfully tested to UL Standard 555 -6th Edition as to their ability to close under dynamic airflow conditions and shall bear the UL label stating that they are suitable for that application. Static fire dampers designed to operate with no airflow in the ductwork shall not be acceptable. Dynamic closure fire dampers shall have been successfully tested in both horizontal and vertical mounting positions to close against a velocity of 2,400 fpm (12.2 m/s) and a static pressures of 4.5 in. w.g. (1.12 kPa). 2) Multiple Blade Dampers: Galvanized steel frame and blades, oil-impregnated bronze or stainless steel sleeve bearings and plated steel axles, plated steel concealed linkage, stainless steel closure spring, and blade stops. Dampers shall be dual-directional airflow rated for ease of installation. a) For applications requiring a 1-1/2-hour rated damper, at operating velocities up to 1,500 fpm (7.6 m/s) and fan or air handler external static pressures up to 2 in. w.g. (0.5 kPa), fire dampers shall be equal to Ruskin DFD35, with vee-groove reinforced formed blades, rated for 2,000 fpm (10.1 m/s) and 4 in. w.g. (1.0 kPa) maximum. Pressure drop at 1,000 fpm (5.08 m/s) in a 24 in. x 24 in. (600 x 600 mm) damper shall not exceed 0.07 in. w.g. (17.5 Pa). b) For applications where required fire rating, velocity, or static pressure is higher (and at lower-rated locations at the Contractor’s option), dampers shall be equal to Ruskin DFD60, airfoil-shaped blades, rated for 4,000 fpm (20.3 m/s) and 4 in. w.g. (2.0 kPa) maximum, 1-1/2-hour or 3-hour rated as required. Pressure drop at 1,000 fpm (5.08 m/s) in a 24 in. x 24 in. (600 x 600 mm) damper shall not exceed 0.03 in. w.g. (7.5 Pa). c) Damper linkage shall be capable of being held open with a pair of hand pliers while the fusible link is replaced during testing. 3) Curtain-Type Dampers: For use in easy-access locations directly behind grilles and registers or open-ended ducts ONLY. Type B with blades out of the air stream. Provide thinline type where required. Galvanized steel with interlocking blades. Stainless steel closure springs. c. Submittals shall include a schedule of damper locations indicating size, design airflow, design airflow face velocity, system external static pressure, and fire rating of the building assembly, with selected damper model, accompanied by damper and accessory data sheets and manufacturer’s installation instructions. If only one model of damper is required, submittals may be simplified accordingly. d. Dampers may be furnished with factory sleeves (verify length and gage), retaining angles, and breakaway connections at the Contractor’s option. e. Dampers for Out-of-Wall or Out-of-Floor Installation: Provide factory assembly including damper, sleeve, and factory-installed fire-retardant insulation. 3. Ceiling Dampers: a. To provide fire and heat protection where HVAC components penetrate the ceiling membrane of fire-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies, standard 1-1/2 and 3 hour primary fire dampers DO NOT provide the necessary protection. Ceiling dampers are required. b. Description: UL Classified radiation dampers, galvanized steel, with butterfly-type blades, UL-classified blade insulation as required. c. Provide external thermal insulating blankets as required by damper manufacturer. Provide retainer wire as required. d. Associated components (air devices, ductwork, supports) shall be steel. For installation with non-ferrous air devices, provide steel extensions and/or steel angles to the ceiling surface as required by damper manufacturer. 4. Fusible Links: UL 33, separate at 165 degrees F (100 degrees C) with adjustable link straps for combination fire/balancing dampers. Provide links melting at 212 degrees F (100 degrees C) within 50 feet (15.2 m) downstream of heating coils. a. Mounting shall either be the flat-strap type requiring no tools to bend the straps for removing the link, or shall use standard threaded hex-nut fastening. Fastening with heavy-gauge wire hooks or other methods requiring difficult bending are not allowed. b. Links shall be Nailor Industries Easy Maintenance Link (EML) or equal. Accessible from either side of the damper. Allows for releasing, testing, and relatching of blades with one hand. 5. Testing and Access: See Part 3 of this Section for requirements for field testing of each damper, and associated access doors. Provide replacement fusible links as required. During testing, furnish means for holding dampers open while fusible link is reset. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  D. Smoke Dampers: 1. Dampers shall be equal to Ruskin SD60 (galvanized steel) or SD50 (aluminum) with airfoil blades. 2. Fabricate in accordance with NFPA 90A and UL 555S -4th Edition, and as specified or as indicated on the Drawings. Rated operation shall be 4,000 fpm face velocity and 4 in. w.g. static pressure. Sizes with these ratings are limited; provide multiple sections where necessary. 3. Dampers: UL Leakage Class 1 multiple blade type smoke damper, normally open or closed (verify application), automatically operated by electric actuator. 4. Operators: UL listed and labeled direct-coupled spring-return electric type suitable for 120 volts, single phase, 60 Hz. a. At Contractor’s option, actuator voltage may be 24 VAC; provide power supplies as required. b. Provide end switches to indicate damper position. c. Locate damper operator on exterior of duct and link to damper operating shaft. E. Volume Control Dampers: 1. Factory-fabricate in accordance with SMACNA HVAC DCS, and as specified or as indicated on the Drawings. 2. Shop fabrication is permitted for single blade dampers only. 3. Height is the dimension perpendicular to the blade rod or shaft. Width is the dimension parallel to the blade rod. 4. Single Blade Dampers: For duct sizes (height x width) up to 7 x 30 inch (175 x 760 mm). When height or width exceeds its respective maximum, provide multi-blade damper. 5. Multi-Blade Damper: Opposed blade pattern with maximum blade sizes (height x width) 8 x 72 inch (200 x 1825 mm). Assemble center and edge crimped blades in prime coated or galvanized channel frame with suitable hardware. 6. End Bearings: Except in round ductwork 6 inches (150 mm) and smaller, provide end bearings. On multiple blade dampers, provide oil-impregnated nylon or sintered bronze bearings. Provide retainer clips or other devices to prevent bearings from pulling out. For single-blade dampers, plastic bearings are allowed. a. Manufacturers: 1) Duro Dyne. 2) Elgen Manufacturing. 3) Ventfabrics. b. Snap-in Plastic Bearings for Single-Blade Dampers: Designed to push into hole in sheet metal, with retaining tabs. Flame Retardant, Glass Reinforced, “Zytel” polymer by Dupont, conforming to UL 1995 and UL 94 with the required flammability rating of 5VA or lower. Acceptable materials include Polyamide 66 (PA66) (glass-reinforced Dupont Zytel), nylon and acetyl. Submit manufacturer’s verification of the suitability of these bearings for the application, including operating pressures and temperatures. 7. Quadrants: a. Manufacturers: 1) Duro-Dyne. 2) Elgen Manufacturing. 3) Ventfabrics. b. Duro-Dyne Specline SR and SRH series; Quadline series; or Stampline dial regulators and wedge-loc regulators. Or equal by Elgen, or Ventfabrics. Factory-manufactured dampers shall have damper manufacturer’s choice of quadrant equal to the Duro-Dyne products specified. c. Provide locking, indicating quadrant regulators on single and multi-blade dampers. Regulators shall include lever handle, locking wing nut and graduated indicator dial. Provide shaft seals, bushings, or gaskets for duct penetrations. Quadrants without these features are not allowed. d. On insulated ducts mount quadrant regulators on stand-off mounting brackets, bases, or adapters, with open space to run insulation through. e. Where rod lengths exceed 30 inches (750 mm) provide regulator at both ends, with a single rod so that either regulator will control the entire damper. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  8. Remote Manual Operators: a. Manufacturers: 1) Young Regulator Company. b. Cable Type with Rack and Pinion: Bowden remote cable assembly, including rack and pinion controllers at damper and ceiling, galvanized angle bracket for duct mounting, stainless pull wire with galvanized steel flexible outer casing, and 2-5/8 in. (66 mm) diameter zinc cup with 3 in. (76 mm) diameter cover plate. c. Cable Type with Worm Gear Actuator: Model 1200-FS with worm gear operator for duct mounting, flexible shaft, and concealed ceiling cup and cover. d. Rigid Shaft Type with Worm Gear Actuator: 927 or 1200 series worm gear assembly, 301 or 315 series concealed ceiling regulator with cup and cap, and square connecting rod. e. Cover Plate Finish: Selected by Architect, from manufacturer’s standard offerings including zinc plated, chrome plated, stainless steel, and primer painted. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  9. Provide required operating wrenches for balancing, and furnish to the Owner at project completion. 2.3 IRIS DAMPERS A. Manufacturers: 1. Ruskin -VFBD35 Series. 2. Continental Fan Manufacturing Inc. – Iris Series. 3. FanTech -IR Series. B. Galvanized steel construction, full circumferential neoprene or EPDM seals to inlet and outlet ducts, 6 CFM (10.2 m3/hr) maximum casing leakage, permanent plastic or metal pressure taps, accuracy +/-5 percent. Frame shall fully encapsulate iris blade segments, and have rolled edges for strength. Blade segments shall be internally linked to an adjustment knob or lever with calibrated position indicator. Internal linkage fully encapsulated out of the airstream. Linear response of airflow to damper position. Designed for low self-noise generation. C. Blades open fully for duct cleaning. Full airtight closure capability is not required unless indicated on the Drawings. D. Installation Note: For precise metering of airflow, the iris damper should be located at minimum 1 diameter before or after an elbow, 3 diameters before a tee, 1 diameter after a tee, and 3 diameters before an outlet register. 2.4 DRIP PANS A. Provide each cooling coil section in both field-and-factory assembled casings with a stainless or galvanized steel drip pan not less than 18 ga (1.31 mm) with drain connections. Drip pans shall collect, confine, and dispose of condensate from cooling coils and attachments, including headers, return bends, distributors, and uninsulated pipe and fittings. Slope pans toward the drain pipe connection(s) to ensure complete drainage. Where individual coil fins are in section (not in one piece from top to bottom of coil bank), provide auxiliary drip troughs at bottom of each section with drains to drip pans. Insulate drip pans with water impervious insulation of sufficient thickness to prevent condensate formation on the exterior at ambient conditions to be encountered. 2.5 DUCT ACCESS DOORS A. Manufacturers: 1. Standard Doors: a. Ruskin. b. Air Balance, Inc. c. Arrow. d. Buckley Associates. e. Cesco. f. DuctMate. g. Greenheck. h. Nailor. i. Vent Products, Inc. j. Shop fabricated. 2. Medium and High-Pressure Doors: a. Ruskin. b. DuctMate. c. Greenheck. d. Nailor. e. No substitutions. B. Fabricated in accordance with SMACNA HVAC DCS, and as specified or as indicated on the Drawings. Standard access doors and access doors for grease ducts may be shop-fabricated. Pressure rating shall be equal to the rating of the associated ductwork; see Part 3 Division 23 Section “Metal Ducts” for schedule of pressure classes. C. Standard Doors: Removable, with retainer chain. Rigid and close-fitting with sealing gaskets and quick fastening locking devices. For insulated ductwork, install minimum 1 inch (25 mm) thick insulation with galvanized steel sheet metal airstream-side cover. 1. 16 inches (406 mm) Square and Smaller: Secure with two sash locks. 2. Over 16 inches (406 mm), up to 24 inches (610 mm) Square: Provide four sash locks. 3. Larger Sizes: Hinges and two compression latches with outside and inside handles. 4. Clamping-type doors with knob handles, as manufactured by Ductmate, may be substituted for standard sizes. 5. Material: Galvanized steel in galvanized steel ductwork. Stainless steel in stainless steel ductwork. Aluminum as manufactured by Arrow in aluminum ductwork. 6. Provide in negative-pressure systems, and in positive-pressure systems with specified pressure class at or below 2 in. WG (498 Pa). D. Medium-and High-Pressure Positive-Pressure Ducts: 1. Ruskin ADHP-3 high pressure access door rated up to 12 in. WG (2985 Pa), with spring latches to allow the door to open temporarily to relieve negative pressures. 2. Provide in positive-pressure systems with specified pressure class above 2 in. WG (498 Pa). E. Access doors with sheet metal screw fasteners are not acceptable. F. Sizing: Select sizes to allow testing, service, and maintenance within the ductwork. Such access may require the insertion of one or both hands, arms, and shoulders as appropriate. Doors sized for viewing-only are not acceptable. Doors found to be of inadequate size shall be replaced with proper size. 2.6 DUCT SLEEVES, PREPARED OPENINGS AND CLOSURE COLLARS A. Duct Sleeves and Closure Collars: Fabricate from minimum 20 ga (1.0 mm) galvanized steel or equivalent thickness of aluminum, select material to match duct material. Where sleeves are installed in bearing walls, provide structural steel sleeves. B. Prepared Openings: Provide 1 inch (25.4 mm) clearance between the duct and the sleeve. 2.7 DUCT TEST HOLES A. Manufacturers: 1. Ductmate. 2. Carlyle Corporation. 3. Duro-Dyne. 4. Ventfabrics. B. Temporary Test Holes: Cut or drill in ducts as required. Cap with neat patches, neoprene plugs, threaded plugs, or threaded or twist-on metal caps. C. Permanent Test Holes: Factory fabricated, air tight flanged fittings with screw cap. Provide extended neck fittings to clear insulation. 2.8 FLEXIBLE DUCT CONNECTIONS A. Manufacturers: 1. Ductmate. 2. Ventfabrics. 3. Duro-Dyne. 4. No substitutions. B. Fabricate in accordance with SMACNA HVAC DCS, and as specified or as indicated on the Drawings. C. Connector: Fabric crimped into metal edging strip. 1. Connectors shall be Ductmate PROFLEX Commercial series. 2. Fabric: UL listed coated woven glass fiber fabric meeting the requirements of NFPA 90A and NFPA 701. Resistant to weather and most chemicals, fat, grease, and oil. a. Supply Ducts: Neoprene coated, minimum density 30 oz per sq yd (1.0 kg/sq m). Fire-retardant coating. Black color. Temperature range -40 to 200 degrees F (-40 to 93 degrees C). b. Exhaust Ducts Serving Fume Hoods: Hypalon coated, minimum density 24 oz per sq yd (0.8 kg/sq m). Flame proof coating. White color. UV and ozone resistant. Temperature range -40 to 250 degrees F (-40 to 121 degrees C). 3. Net Fabric Width: Approximately 3 inches (75 mm) wide. 4. Metal: 3 inch (75 mm) wide, 24 ga (0.6 mm thick). a. Supply Ducts: G-60 galvanized steel. b. Exhaust Ducts Serving Fume Hoods: Type 316 stainless steel. 5. Connectors shall have double fold seams. Single fold seams (metal folded once only) shall not be accepted. 2.9 ROOF CURBS A. Manufacturers: 1. Greenheck. 2. Acme Engineering and Manufacturing Corp. 3. Loren Cook. 4. Thybar Corporation. B. For miscellaneous duct applications requiring roof curbs which are not specified with equipment in other Sections, provide curbs as specified in this Section. C. Construction: Galvanized steel or aluminum, with continuously welded seams, 1-1/2 in. (38 mm) thick rigid fiberglass insulation with 3.0 lb/cu.ft (48 kg/m3) density and coated for airstream exposure, base flashing flange at least 1-1/8 in. (38 mm) wide, and factory installed wood nailer strip installed with notched and lapped joints for strength. For curbs where duct is not continuous thru the curb (such as curbs with sound baffles), provide metal liner to keep the wood nailer out of the airstream. For curbs with hot ducts where clearance to combustibles is a concern, wood nailer may be omitted. D. Height: For installations where base of curb is under the roof insulation, curb shall be 16 inch (400 mm) high (unless otherwise indicated or specified) with built-in cant strips. For installations where base of curb is not under any roof insulation (but may be under thin roof finish material such as membrane, shingles, or metal roofing), curb shall be at least 12 inch (300 mm) high (unless otherwise indicated) with no cant strips. E. Pitched Roof Curbs: Curbs for pitched and double-pitched roofs shall have base with built-in slopes to match roof pitches. Height of these curbs shall be at least the height specified above, measured at the highest point on the sloped base. F. Curb Seal: Provide rubber curb seal for installation between curb and equipment. 2.10 ROUND DUCT BRANCH TAPS AND SPIN-IN FITTINGS A. Saddle Taps: For round ducts branching off main ducts at 90 degrees, provide factory fabricated, saddle-tap fittings with conical or bellmouth taps, or 45 degree rectangular.to-round branch fittings. For round ducts branching off at 45 degrees, fittings do not require conical or bellmouth expansion. Fittings shall be furnished with flange for fastening and sealing designed to overlap onto adjacent duct, and shall be shaped to fit tight to the exterior of the duct, flat for rectangular duct, curved for round duct. B. Spin-in fittings, factory-fabricated with conical or bellmouth taps are an acceptable substitute for saddle taps. C. Factory-fabricated taps and spin-ins may be furnished with integral volume dampers and quadrants as specified in paragraph “Manual Dampers” in this Section. 2.11 TURNING VANES A. Manufacturers for Turning Vanes and Vane Rails: 1. Ductmate Industries -PROrail 2 inch Turning Vane Rail. 2. Duro Dyne -Junior Vane Rail. 3. Hardcast, a division of Carlisle Corporation -Dyn-O-Rail Jr. B. Factory-fabricated and factory-or-field-assembled units consisting of curved turning vanes for uniform air distribution and change of direction with minimum turbulence and pressure loss. Provide curved single thickness vanes for mitered elbows with change in direction of 45 degrees or greater, conforming to SMACNA HVACDCS single vane schedule for small vanes. Each vane shall form a 90 degree arc. Fill the entire duct cross-section with vanes. Orient leading edge of vanes parallel to the side of the duct (directed straight into the entering airstream). C. Turning vanes shall be minimum 16 gauge (1.61 mm) unless otherwise detailed on the Drawings, regardless of gauges that are recommended by SMACNA. Double thickness turning vanes are not allowed. D. Turning vanes in rectangular ductwork and shop-fabricated round ductwork shall conform with details on the Drawings. If not detailed, the SMACNA detail for small-radius small-spacing single-thickness vanes shall be used. E. Turning vanes in manufactured round and flat oval duct elbows shall be the duct manufacturer’s standard size, spacing, and gauge, but must be single-wall and not less than 16 gauge (1.61 mm). F. Factory-fabricated turning vane rails shall be a minimum of 24 ga (0.7 mm) galvanized steel. G. Material for vanes and rails shall be the same as the duct sheet metal. 2.12 WIRE MESH FOR SCREENS A. Manufacturers: 1. McNichols Co. 2. Banker Wire and Iron Works, Inc. 3. Belleville Wire Cloth Co. 4. Edward J. Darby & Son, Inc. 5. No substitutions. B. Galvanized Welded Wire Mesh: Hardware and industrial class welded wire square mesh, hot dipped galvanized, welded trimmed construction, 2 mesh (2 openings per inch, wires 1/2 inch on center), 0.0630 inch wire nominal diameter parallel to width and length, 0.437 inch openings, 76 percent open area, 0.51 lb/sq. ft weight. Specification is the minimum acceptable for strength and weight of materials. C. Material to Match Ductwork: Where screens are installed in ductwork or louvers of other materials such as stainless steel or aluminum, provide screens of material to match the ductwork or louver, with strength equal to the requirements specified for galvanized mesh. Aluminum screens may be fabricated of expanded metal instead of welded wire. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  D. Provide mesh installed in a removable frame to support the mesh completely flat and rigid, with fasteners in an accessible location. 2.13 UNIFORMITY OF MATERIALS A. Ductwork accessories, including but not limited to volume dampers, smoke dampers, fire dampers, combination fire/smoke dampers, backdraft dampers and motorized dampers, shall be fabricated of materials that are similar to the ductwork in which they are installed. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 PREPARATION A. Verify that electric power is available and of the correct characteristics. 3.2 INSTALLATION A. Install accessories in accordance with manufacturer's instructions, NFPA 90A, and follow SMACNA HVACDCS. Refer to Division 23 Section “Metal Ducts” for duct construction and pressure class. B. Install components furnished under other Section and Divisions of the Specifications. Such items may include but are not limited to: Sensors and airflow measuring stations furnished under Division 23 Section “Instrumentation and Control for Mechanical Systems”; gauges and meters; and smoke detectors furnished under Division 26 – Electrical. C. Provide duct access doors in horizontal return air, exhaust air and fresh air intake ductwork to facilitate the removal of accumulations of dust and combustible materials in accordance with NFPA 90A. Install access doors at maximum 20 foot (6 m) intervals and at the base of each vertical riser. D. Provide duct access doors for inspection, servicing, and cleaning before filters, before and after coils, before and after fans, before automatic dampers, at fire dampers, at smoke dampers, at combination fire and smoke dampers, at smoke detector sampling tubes (upstream of the sampling tube), at multiple blade volume dampers, and elsewhere as specified or as indicated on the Drawings. E. Access doors installed for access to fire dampers and fire/smoke dampers shall be provided with identification with letters of minimum 1/2 inch (13 mm) height to indicate the presence of fire protection devices within. Conform with NFPA 90A and applicable Codes. Refer to Division 23 Section “Identification for HVAC Piping and Equipment” for labeling materials specifications. F. Provide fire dampers at locations indicated, where ducts and outlets pass through fire rated components. Install with required perimeter mounting angles, sleeves, breakaway duct connections, corrosion resistant springs, bearings, bushings and hinges. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  G. Install smoke dampers and combination smoke and fire dampers in accordance with NFPA 92A. H. Fire Damper Testing: Demonstrate operation and re-setting of each fire damper and fire/smoke damper to Owner's representative after installation and prior to building occupancy. Remove or melt the fusible link and allow the damper to close, then reopen the damper and replace the link. Repair or replace any damper which doesn’t close and open properly. Coordinate with access door installation to ensure that access doors are of adequate size and location to allow required reach with 2 hands to hold the damper open while replacing the link. I. Provide balancing dampers at points on supply, return, and exhaust systems where branches are taken from larger ducts as required for air balancing. Install minimum 2 duct widths from duct take-off. J. Use splitter dampers only where indicated. K. Provide balancing dampers on duct take-offs to diffusers, grilles, and registers, regardless of whether dampers are specified as part of the diffuser, grille, or register assembly. Where branch duct is completely above non-accessible wallboard ceiling and the Architect has not approved the use of access doors, duct mounted balancing dampers shall not be required. L. For volume dampers located above suspended ceilings and in areas that are not visible to building occupants (e.g., mechanical rooms), provide fluorescent orange colored surveyor’s tape. Permanently attach tape to damper handles and run tape down to 10 in. (254 mm) above ceiling or 12 in. (304 mm) below damper handle where ceilings do not exist (e.g., mechanical rooms). M. Provide flexible connections immediately adjacent to equipment in ducts associated with fans and motorized equipment, and support by vibration isolators. Staple and seal connections airtight. N. Duct Sleeves and Prepared Openings: Install for ducts passing through roofs, ceilings, walls and floors. Field determine the proper size and location of sleeves and prepared openings. 1. Duct Sleeves: Allow one-inch (25 mm) clearance between duct and sleeve or one-inch (25 mm) clearance between insulation and sleeve for insulated ducts, except at grilles, registers, and diffusers. 2. Prepared Openings: Allow one-inch (25 mm) clearance between duct and opening or one-inch (25 mm) clearance between insulation and opening for insulated ducts, except at grilles, registers, and diffusers. O. Closure Collars: 1. Provide not less than 4 inches (100 mm) wide on each side of walls or floors where sleeves or prepared openings are installed. Fit collars snugly around ducts. Grind smooth edges of collar to prevent tearing or puncturing insulation covering or vapor barrier. 2. Where insulated ducts penetrate non-fire-rated walls, insulation shall be continuous through the closure collars and the closure collars shall be installed tight to the insulation. 3. Where insulated ducts penetrate fire rated walls, insulate ducts on both sides of closure collars and seal points of contact between closure collar and insulation with vapor proof adhesive. 4. Where ducts penetrate fire rated walls, provide fire proof sealant at closure collar. Refer to Division 07 Section “Penetration Firestopping,” for fire proof sealant requirements. 5. Secure closure collars to ducts with sheet metal screws at maximum 6 inch (152 mm) centers and secure closure collars to walls or floors with sheetrock screws, nails or other appropriate fastener at maximum 6 inch (152 mm) centers. 6. Packing: Pack with non-combustible glass fiber insulation in spaces between sleeve/opening and duct/duct insulation. Cover or seal edges of packing to contain loose fibers. P. Duct Hangers and Supports: SMACNA HVACDCS, Section 4. Hang ducts up to and including 36 inches (914 mm) in width by a minimum of 1 in x 16 ga (25 mm x 1.61 mm) flat straps on each side of the duct on 4 ft (1.22 m) centers, bent under bottom of duct a minimum of 2 inches (50 mm) and securely fastened to duct. Hang ducts larger than 36 inches (914 mm) in width by 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) steel rods and 2 x 2 x 1/4-inch (50x50x6.3 mm) steel angle trapeze hangers, spaced 4 ft (1.22 mm) on center. Provide seismic restraint complying with SMACNA SRMGMS. Anchor risers in the center of the vertical run to allow ends of riser free vertical movements. Attach supports only to structural framing members and concrete slabs. Do not anchor supports to metal decking unless a means is provided and approved for preventing the anchors from puncturing the metal decking. Where supports are required between structural framing member, provide suitable intermediate metal framing. Where C clamps are used, use retainer clips. 1. Flexible Ducts: Support ducts by hangers every 3 feet (0.9 m), unless supported by ceiling construction. Stretch flexible air ducts to smooth out corrugations, and long radius elbows, where possible, using a minimum length to make connections. 2. Flexible Connectors: Provide flexible connectors between fans and ducts or casings and where ducts are of dissimilar metals. For round ducts, securely fasten flexible connectors by zinc-coated steel clinch-type draw-bands. For rectangular ducts, lock flexible connectors to metal collars. Q. Drain (Drip) Pans, Drain Connections, and Drain Lines: Provide coils with drain and drain connections. Where coils are sectionalized, with one section above the other, provide intermediate drain pans. There shall be no entrainment of water in air stream. Drain condensate from drain pans to the nearest disposal points as specified or as indicated on the Drawings. Equip drain lines with U-traps and a seal height one-inch greater than the maximum static pressure rating of the fan system. Insure pans drain completely under operating conditions. R. Provide duct test holes where indicated and required for testing and balancing purposes. END OF SECTION 233300 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  SECTION 233700 AIR OUTLETS AND INLETS GENERAL 1.1 SECTION INCLUDES A. Diffusers, Registers/Grilles. 1.2 RELATED SECTIONS A. Division 09 Section “Painting”: Painting of ductwork visible behind outlets and inlets. 1.3 REFERENCES A. AAMA 611 -Voluntary Specification for Anodized Architectural Aluminum. B. ADC 1062 -Certification, Rating and Test Manual. C. AMCA 500 -Test Method for Louvers, Dampers and Shutters. D. AMCA 511 -Certified Ratings Program for Air Control Devices E. ARI 650 -Air Outlets and Inlets. F. ASHRAE 70 -Method of Testing for Rating the Air Flow Performance of Outlets and Inlets. G. ASTM E90 -Standard Test Method for Laboratory Measurement of Airborne Sound Transmission Loss of Building Partitions and Elements. H. ASTM E413 -Classification for Rating Sound Insulation. I. SMACNA -HVAC Duct Construction Standard -Metal and Flexible. J. NFPA 70 -National Electrical Code. K. NFPA 90A -Installation of Air Conditioning and Ventilating Systems. 1.4 SUBMITTALS A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Submittal Procedures.” B. Product Data: Provide data for equipment required for this project. Review outlets and inlets as to size, finish, and type of mounting prior to submission. Submit schedule of outlets and inlets indicating type, size, application, rated airflow, noise level, pressure drop, and throw distance as applicable. Submit both manufacturer’s standard performance tables and graphs, AND tabulated selection data specific to this project. NOTE: Submittals without complete and sufficient information, to verify the AIR OUTLETS AND INLETS 233700 -1 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  performance specified and scheduled on the Drawings, shall be rejected. 1.5 PROJECT RECORD DOCUMENTS A. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Closeout Procedures.” B. Record actual locations of air outlets and inlets. 1.6 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Test and rate air outlet and inlet performance in accordance with ADC Equipment Test Code 1062 and ASHRAE 70. B. Test and rate louver performance in accordance with AMCA 500. 1.7 QUALIFICATIONS A. Manufacturer: Company specializing in manufacturing the Products specified in this Section with minimum 3 years’ experience. PRODUCTS 2.1 MANUFACTURERS A. Diffusers, Registers, and Grilles: 1. Titus. 2. Anemostat. 3. Krueger. 4. Metalaire. 5. Price. 2.2 DISPLACEMENT VENTILATION DIFFUSERS A. Type: Perforated-face, low-velocity, non-directional diffuser to discharge air uniformly as indicated. Style as indicated, including but not limited to surface mounted or concealed, 1-way, 3-way, and radius patterns. Equalization baffle behind the perforated face. Integral plenum and duct collar. B. Fabrication: Steel frame and face, steel plenum, aluminum baffle, with baked enamel off-white finish on exposed surfaces. C. Accessories: Vibration damping for mounting perforated materials to the frame. Concealed mounting brackets. Stainless steel machine screws for plenum access and cleaning. AIR OUTLETS AND INLETS 233700 -2 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  2.3 CEILING EXHAUST AND RETURN REGISTERS/GRILLES A. Type: Streamlined blades, 3/4 inch (19 mm) minimum depth, 3/4 inch (19 mm) maximum spacing, with blades set at 45 degrees, vertical or horizontal face as indicated. B. Frame: 1-1/4 inch (32 mm) margin with concealed mounting. C. Fabrication: Steel with 20 gauge (0.90 mm) minimum frames and 22 gauge (0.80 mm) minimum blades, steel and aluminum with 20 gauge (0.90 mm) minimum frame, or aluminum extrusions, as indicated, with factory off-white enamel finish. D. Damper: Integral, gang-operated, opposed blade type with removable key operator, operable from face where not individually connected to exhaust fans. 2.4 CEILING GRID CORE EXHAUST AND RETURN REGISTERS/GRILLES A. Type: Fixed grilles of 1/2 x 1/2 x 1/2 inch (13 x 13 x 13 mm) vanes in square grid pattern. B. Frame: 1-1/4 inch (32 mm) margin with concealed mounting. For suspended grid ceilings, provide channel lay-in frame for suspended grid ceilings. C. Fabrication: Aluminum with factory off-white enamel finish. D. Damper: Integral, gang-operated, opposed blade type with removable key operator, operable from face. 2.5 WALL EXHAUST AND RETURN REGISTERS/GRILLES A. Type: Streamlined blades, 3/4 inch (19 mm) minimum depth, 3/4 inch (19 mm) maximum spacing, with blades set at 45 degrees, vertical or horizontal face as indicated. B. Frame: 1-1/4 inch (32 mm) margin with concealed mounting. C. Fabrication: Steel with 20 gauge (0.90 mm) minimum frames and 22 gauge (0.80 mm) minimum blades, steel and aluminum with 20 gauge (0.90 mm) minimum frame, or aluminum extrusions, as indicated, with factory off-white enamel finish. D. Damper: Integral, gang-operated, opposed blade type with removable key operator, operable from face where not individually connected to exhaust fans. 2.6 INSTALLATION A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Check location of outlets and inlets and make necessary adjustments in position to conform to architectural features, symmetry, and lighting arrangement. AIR OUTLETS AND INLETS 233700 -3 C. Install outlets and inlets to ductwork with air tight connection. D. Slope ducts or plenums at louvers, and at brick or block vents, to drain outward, and seal bottoms watertight. E. Provide balancing dampers on duct take-off to diffusers, and grilles and registers, despite whether dampers are specified as part of the diffuser, or grille and register assembly. F. Paint ductwork visible behind air outlets and inlets matte black. Refer to Division 09 Section “Painting.” G. Surfaces exposed to view shall be clean, and free of stains, smudges, and scratches. H. Provide hex-head fasteners to curb in each hole in curb caps or bases of roof-mounted units. Provide protection between dissimilar metals. END OF SECTION 233700 AIR OUTLETS AND INLETS 233700 -4 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  SECTION 235216 CONDENSING BOILERS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. The section includes gas-fired, fire-tube condensing boilers, trim, and accessories for generating hot water. 1.3 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For each type of product. 1. Include construction details, material descriptions, dimensions of individual components and profiles, and finishes for boilers. 2. Include rated capacities, operating characteristics, and furnished specialties and accessories. B. Shop Drawings: For boilers, boiler trim, and accessories. 1. Include plans, elevations, sections, and attachment details. 2. Include details of equipment assemblies. Indicate dimensions, weights, loads, required clearances, method of field assembly, components, and location and size of each field connection. 3. Include diagrams for power, signal, and control wiring. 1.4 INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS A. Source quality-control reports. B. Field quality-control reports. C. Sample Warranty: For special warranty. D. Product Certificates: 1. ASME Stamp Certification and Report: Submit "A," "S," or "PP" stamp certificate of authorization, as required by authorities having jurisdiction, and document hydrostatic testing of piping external to boiler. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  1.5 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Operation and Maintenance Data: For boilers to include in emergency, operation, and maintenance manuals. 1.6 WARRANTY A. Manufacturer's Warranty: Manufacturer agrees to repair or replace components of boilers that fail in materials or workmanship within specified warranty period. 1. Warranty Period for Fire-Tube Condensing Boilers: a. Leakage and Materials: 5 years from date of Substantial Completion. b. Heat Exchanger Damaged by Thermal Stress and Corrosion: Nonprorated for ten years from date of Substantial Completion. c. All other parts shall have a five year limited warranty covering defects in materials and workmanship. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. B. ASME Compliance: Fabricate and label boilers to comply with 2010 ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code. C. ASHRAE/IES 90.1 Compliance: Boilers shall have minimum efficiency according to "Gas Fired Boilers -Minimum Efficiency Requirements." D. DOE Compliance: Minimum efficiency shall comply with 10 CFR 430, Subpart B, Appendix N. E. UL Compliance: Test boilers for compliance with UL 795. Boilers shall be listed and labeled by a testing agency acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction. F. Mounting Base: For securing boiler to concrete base. 2.2 FORCED-DRAFT, FIRE-TUBE CONDENSING BOILERS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. HTP Boiler 2. Camus Hydronics 3. Or approved Equal B. Boiler Construction 1. The heat exchanger shall be a horizontal firetube design. The combustion chamber, firetubes, tube sheet and shell shall be constructed of stainless steel. The heat exchanger shall be certified and stamped for 160 PSI and shall be national board listed. The heat exchanger is removable from the cabinet for replacement without removing the entire boiler assembly from the site. The stainless-steel combustion chamber shall be designed to direct condensate to the rear of the chamber to ensure that condensation does not collect in the boiler. 2. The boiler shall be constructed with a heavy gauge steel jacket assembly, primed and pre-painted on both sides. The boiler jacket shall afford easy access to all components through easily removable access doors to facilitate service of all components. The combustion chamber shall be sealed and completely enclosed, independent of the outer jacket assembly, so that integrity of the outer jacket does not affect a proper seal. A burner/flame observation port shall be provided. The burner shall be a premix design and constructed of high-grade stainless-steel with modulating firing rates. The boiler shall be supplied with a gas valve designed with a negative pressure regulation pneumatic gas valve and be equipped with a variable speed blower system to precisely control the fuel/air mixture to provide modulating boiler firing rates for maximum efficiency. The boiler shall operate in a safe condition at a derated output with gas supply pressures as low as 3 . inches of water column. 3. The customer connection board shall be equipped with two types of screw connectors. The smaller green terminal blocks are designated for low voltage connection inputs including thermostat, DHW sensor, system sensor, outdoor sensor, 0-10VDC, external low water cut off input signals, bus wiring connections, and Low Voltage Output 0-10 volt -A (Modulating Pump Output) and Low Voltage B (see the status of various parameters through 0-10VDC output for the Fan Speed -Boiler Power -Cascade Power Alarm Status or Target temperature). The larger black barrier strips are designated for 120-volt connections for incoming power, central heat pump (CH), DHW pump (indirect water heater), and system pump operation with additional double pole relay rated at 5 amp for Alarm Output. The three pump outputs are 2-amp fuse protected in 400 – 1500 models, and 5-amp fuse protected in 2000 models. The control cabinet will also include two RJ-45 style jacks for cascade communication bus wiring using CAT 5 or CAT 3 cables. These connections and fuses are accessed from the outside of the boiler by removing an access door. The electrical supply for 400 – 1500 models shall be 120 volt / 60 hertz / 20A single phase; on 2000 models the electrical supply shall be 208 volt / 60 hertz / 3 phase wye 15A leg. Two additional electrical connections are provided internal to the boiler cabinet for the connection of optional high and low gas pressure switches. The boiler comes equipped with an Integrated UL 353 certified CSD-1 compliant low water cut-off with manual reset. An outdoor sensor is supplied with the boiler. The combustion system shall be fully modulating with a 10:1 turndown ratio. 4. The boiler shall utilize a 120 VAC control circuit and components. The control system shall have a seven-inch (7”) color touch screen display for boiler setup, status, and diagnostics. All components shall be easily accessed and serviceable from the front, right, and left sides of the jacket. The boiler shall be supplied with a high resolution flow switch to ensure minimum flow rates through the heat exchanger, temperature/pressure gauge, ASME certified pressure relief valve, Dual Water Supply Temperature Sensor / High Limit (210 deg. F), return water temperature sensor, blocked vent pressure switch, flue temperature sensor, built-in freeze protection, and an optional high limit temperature control with manual reset. The boiler shall also be equipped with an outdoor temperature reset function. 5. The boiler features the HTP Link system as standard equipment. HTP Link offers a WiFi connection, allowing the user to remotely monitor boiler operation, change system parameters to maximize boiler efficiency, and alerting the user when system issues occur to aid in troubleshooting. The boiler shall include an ON/OFF power switch and feature the 928 intelligent control system with color touch screen display with graphic indicators for System Pump, DHW Pump, Boiler Pump, Pump Service Mode, Flame On, and Fault Indication. Pump operation and the combustion system can be manually operated to assist the installer in system commissioning. The control will have password protection for the installer to set limits and configure outdoor reset. The control will have freeze protection (which can be disabled for snowmelt applications), outdoor reset, indirect priority with operation time limits, and a 0-10V DC input for building management system (i.e., programmable to control either boiler temperature or firing). The boiler control shall have an optional gateway device which will allow integration of Modbus or BACnet Protocols. The boiler control is equipped for cascading up to eight boilers for greater system turndown and system backup. 6. The boiler shall be equipped with a condensate collection system equipped with an internal float switch which will protect the boiler from condensation backing up into the combustion chamber. The condensate collection system will be equipped with a 2” NPT threaded cleanout port to allow for easy cleaning and sediment removal. 7. The boiler will have a sealed combustion system, taking outside air for combustion and exhausting the flue gas with a 4" (400 / 500 models), 6” (650, 800 and 1000 models), or 8” (1500 and 2000 models) adapter. The Category IV vent system may be constructed with Stainless Steel or Polypropylene. The boiler's total combined equivalent vent length, including fitting allowances for both intake and exhaust, shall not exceed 125 feet (400 – 1000 Models), or 150 feet (1500 and 2000Models). 8. The boiler shall comply with the NOx emissions limit set forth in SCAQMD Rule 1146.2. The manufacturer shall verify proper operation of the burner, the combustion and control systems, as well as all related safety functions, to ensure the boiler will operate based on its designed parameters before shipping. Complete operating and installation instructions shall be furnished with every boiler as packaged by the manufacturer for shipping. 9. The appliance shall operate at high elevations without additional parts. However, adjustments to the combustion system may be required at any elevation. See installation manual for combustion system setting details. 10. See drawings for maximum unit dimensions. PART 3 -EXECUTION Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  3.1 EXAMINATION A. Examine roughing-in for concrete equipment bases, anchor-bolt sizes and locations, and piping and electrical connections to verify actual locations, sizes, and other conditions affecting performance of the Work. 1. Final boiler locations indicated on Drawings are approximate. Determine exact locations before roughing-in for piping and electrical connections. B. Examine mechanical spaces for suitable conditions where boilers will be installed. C. Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected. 3.2 BOILER INSTALLATION A. Equipment Mounting: 1. Install boilers on cast-in-place concrete equipment base(s). B. Install gas-fired boilers according to NFPA 54. C. Assemble and install boiler trim. D. Install electrical devices furnished with boiler but not specified to be factory mounted. E. Install control wiring to field-mounted electrical devices. 3.3 CONNECTIONS A. Piping installation requirements are specified in other Sections. Drawings indicate general arrangement of piping, fittings, and specialties. B. Install piping adjacent to boiler to allow service and maintenance. C. Install piping from equipment drain connection to nearest floor drain. Piping shall be at least full size of connection. Provide an isolation valve if required. D. Connect piping to boilers, except safety relief valve connections, with flexible connectors of materials suitable for service. Flexible connectors and their installation are specified in Section 232118 "Hydronic Specialties." E. Connect gas piping to boiler gas-train inlet with union. Piping shall be at least full size of gas-train connection. Provide a reducer if required. F. Connect hot-water piping to supply-and return-boiler tappings with shutoff valve and union or flange at each connection. G. Install piping from safety relief valves to nearest floor drain. H. Boiler Venting: 1. Install flue venting kit and combustion-air intake. 3.4 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Testing Agency: Engage a qualified testing agency to perform tests and inspections. B. Manufacturer's Field Service: Engage a factory-authorized service representative to test and inspect components, assemblies, and equipment installations, including connections. C. Perform the following tests and inspections with the assistance of a factory-authorized service representative: 1. Perform installation and startup checks according to manufacturer's written instructions. 2. Leak Test: Hydrostatic test. Repair leaks and retest until no leaks exist. 3. Operational Test: Start units to confirm proper motor rotation and unit operation. Adjust air-fuel ratio and combustion. 4. Test and adjust controls and safeties. Replace damaged and malfunctioning controls and equipment. a. Check and adjust initial operating set points and high-and low-limit safety set points of fuel supply, water level, and water temperature. b. Set field-adjustable switches and circuit-breaker trip ranges as indicated. D. Boiler will be considered defective if it does not pass tests and inspections. E. Prepare test and inspection reports. F. Occupancy Adjustments: When requested within 12 months of date of Substantial Completion, provide on-site assistance in adjusting system to suit actual occupied conditions. Provide up to two visits to Project during other-than-normal occupancy hours for this purpose. G. Performance Tests: 1. Engage a factory-authorized service representative to inspect component assemblies and equipment installations, including connections, and to conduct performance testing. 2. Boilers shall comply with performance requirements indicated, as determined by field performance tests. Adjust, modify, or replace equipment to comply. 3. Perform field performance tests to determine capacity and efficiency of boilers. a. Test for full capacity. b. Test for boiler efficiency at low fire 20, 40, 60, 80, 100, 80, 60, 40, and 20 percent of full capacity. Determine efficiency at each test point. 4. Repeat tests until results comply with requirements indicated. 5. Provide analysis equipment required to determine performance. 6. Provide temporary equipment and system modifications necessary to dissipate the heat produced during tests if building systems are inadequate. 7. Notify Architect 24 hours minimum in advance of test dates. 8. Document test results in a report and submit to Architect. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  3.5 DEMONSTRATION A. Engage a factory-authorized service representative to train Owner's maintenance personnel to adjust, operate, and maintain boilers. Refer to Section 017900 "Demonstration and Training." END OF SECTION 235216 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  SECTION 237200 AIR-TO-AIR ENERGY RECOVERY EQUIPMENT GENERAL 1.1 SECTION INCLUDES A. Packaged Air-to-Air Energy Recovery Units. B. Roof Curbs. 1.2 SUBMITTALS A. Division 01 Section “Submittal Procedures”. B. Product Data: 1. Published Literature: Indicate dimensions, weights, capacities, ratings, gauges and finishes of materials, operation and service clearances, and electrical characteristics and connection requirements. Indicate lift points and recommendations and center of gravity. Indicate unit shipping, installation and operating weights including dimensions. 2. Filters: Data for filter media, filter performance data, filter assembly, and filter frames. 3. Fans: Performance and fan curves with specified operating point clearly plotted, power, RPM. 4. Sound Power Level Data: Fan outlet and casing radiation at rated capacity. 5. Electrical Requirements: Power supply wiring including wiring diagrams for interlock and control wiring, clearly indicating factory-installed and field-installed wiring. Include recommended wire and fuse sizes or MCA, sequence of operation, connection points, safety and start-up instructions. 6. Submit unit performance including: capacity, nominal and operating performance. 7. Submit Mechanical Specifications for unit and accessories describing construction, components and options. 1.3 SUBMITTALS AT PROJECT CLOSEOUT A. Division 01 Section “Closeout Procedures”: Procedures for submittals. B. Maintenance Data: Include instructions for lubrication, filter replacement, motor and drive replacement, spare parts lists, and wiring diagrams. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  1.4 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Energy Recovery Units: Product of manufacturer regularly engaged in production of components, who issues complete catalog data on product offering. Manufacturer shall have minimum 3 years’ experience. 1.5 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS A. Products Requiring Electrical Connection: Listed and classified by Underwriters Laboratories Inc., as suitable for the purpose specified and indicated. 1.6 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND PROTECTION A. Division 01 Section “Product Requirements”: Transport, handle, store, and protect products. B. Units shall ship fully assembled up to practical shipping and rigging limitations. Units shipped not fully assembled shall have tags and airflow arrows on each section to indicate location and orientation in direction of airflow. Each section shall have lifting lugs to allow for field rigging and final placement of section. C. Deliver units to site with fan motors, sheaves, and belts completely assembled and mounted in units. D. Accept products on site in factory-fabricated protective containers, with factory-installed shipping skids and lifting lugs. Inspect for damage. E. Store in clean dry place and protect from weather and construction traffic. Handle carefully to avoid damage to components, enclosures, and finish. 1.7 ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS A. Division 01 Section “Product Requirements”: Environmental conditions affecting products on site. B. Do not operate units for any purpose, temporary or permanent, until ductwork is clean, filters are in place, bearings lubricated, and fan has been test run under observation. 1.8 EXTRA MATERIALS A. Division 01 Section “Closeout Procedures.” B. Provide 1 set of filters for each unit, to the Owner in clean, sealed containers. PRODUCTS 2.1 PACKAGED AIR-TO-AIR ENERGY RECOVERY UNITS A. Approved Manufacturers: 1. RenewAire. 2. Greenheck 3. Or approved equal. B. Casing: 1. Materials: Formed double wall insulated metal cabinet, fabricated to permit access to internal components for maintenance. 2. Outside casing: 20 gauge, galvanized (G90) steel meeting ASTM A653 for components that do not receive a painted finish. Painted components as supplied by the factory shall have polyester urethane paint on 20 gauge G90 galvanized steel. 3. Access doors shall be hinged with airtight closed cell foam gaskets. Door pressure taps, with captive plugs, shall be provided for cross-core pressure measurement allowing for accurate airflow measurement. 4. Unit shall have factory-installed duct flanges on all duct openings. 5. Cabinet Insulation: Unit walls and doors shall be insulated with 1 inch, 4 pound density, foil/scrim faced, high density fiberglass board insulation, providing a cleanable surface and eliminating the possibility of exposing the fresh air to glass fibers, and with a minimum R-value of 4.3 (hr-ft2-°F/BTU). 6. Enthalpy core: Energy recovery core shall be of the total enthalpy type, capable of transferring both sensible and latent energy between airstreams. Latent energy transfer shall be accomplished by direct water vapor transfer from one airstream to the other, without exposing transfer media in succeeding cycles directly to the exhaust air and then to the fresh air. No condensate drains shall be allowed. The energy recovery core shall be designed and constructed to permit cleaning and removal for servicing. The energy recovery core shall have a ten year warranty. Performance criteria are to be as specified in AHRI Standard 1060. 7. Control center / connections: Energy Recovery Ventilator shall have an electrical control center where all high and low voltage connections are made. Control center shall be constructed to permit single-point high voltage power supply connections to the fused disconnect. 8. Passive Frost Control: The ERV core shall perform without condensing or frosting under normal operating conditions (defined as outside temperatures above -10ºF and inside relative humidity below 40%). Occasional more extreme conditions shall not affect the usual function, performance or durability of the core. No condensate drains will be allowed. 9. Motorized Isolation Damper(s): Return Air and Outside Air motorized damper(s) of an AMCA Class I low leakage type shall be factory installed. C. Fans: 1. Blower section construction, Supply Air and Exhaust Air: Blower assemblies consist of a 460V 3 Phase 60 HZ, ECM motor, and a direct driven forward-curved blower. 2. Blower assemblies: Shall be statically and dynamically balanced and designed for continuous operation at maximum rated fan speed and horsepower. D. Motors: 1. Fan motors shall be Premium Efficiency, EISA compliant for energy efficiency. The blower motors shall be totally enclosed (TEFC) and be shall be supplied with factory installed motor starters. Direct drive models (EV450 and HE1X models) shall be EISA-compliant for energy efficiency with open drip proof design and integral thermal protection. E. Filters: 1. Filters shall comply with NFPA Standard 90A (Class I or II) “Standard for the Installation of Air Conditioning and Ventilating Systems.” 2. Filters shall comply with section . 3. Filter Section: Outside air inlet shall be equipped with galvanized steel racks to provide for slide out removal of filters, with filter media holding frames arranged for flat orientation. 4. Disposable Filters: Provide disposable extended area pleated-media type air filters, 2 inches (50 mm) thick, MERV 8 efficiency. F. Dampers: 1. General: Leakage rate when tested in accordance with AMCA Standard 500 .Test Method for Louvers, Dampers and Shutters, shall not exceed 0.6 percent of air quantity calculated at 10 in. wg. (2.49 kPa) (type OB). 2. Unit shall be equipped with necessary dampers for outside air intake, exhaust air and defrost system. 3. Unit dampers shall be motorized. Provide damper actuators as manufactured by BELIMO, model NF or AF, 24 VAC driven voltage. 0-10 VDC modulation shall be available when needed. Actuators provided shall comply with Division 23 Section “Instrumentation and Controls for Mechanical Systems.” 4. Damper frame shall be extruded aluminum. 5. Blades shall be extruded aluminum. 6. Dampers shall be opposed blades type for modulating dampers and parallel blades for 2-position dampers. 7. Damper blade ends shall be sealed with neoprene flexible edge seals and bottom and top blade wiper seals. 8. Frame and blades may be insulated or non-insulated, per manufacturer’s standard. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  G. Warranty: Manufacturer shall provide 2 year warranty on parts, and 15 years on the air to air plate heat exchanger excluding labor. Warranties of less duration shall not be acceptable. 2.2 ADDITIONAL FAN CAPACITY A. Air handling unit fans and motors shall be selected to allow for a minimum of 10 percent additional airflow and 10 percent additional static pressure over the values listed in the schedule on the Drawings. 2.3 OTHER EQUIPMENT REQUIRMENTS A. See drawing schedules for cooling, heating or other accessories and performance data that is required. EXECUTION 3.1 INSTALLATION A. Division 01 Section “Quality Requirements”: Manufacturer's instructions. B. Install in accordance with ARI 435. C. Install flexible connections specified in Division 23 Section “Air Duct Accessories” between fan inlet and discharge ductwork. Ensure metal bands of connectors are parallel with minimum 1 inch (25 mm) flex between ductwork and fan while running. D. Provide sheaves and belts required for final air balance. Coordinate with Division 23 Section “Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing for Mechanical Systems.” E. Make connections to coils with unions or flanges. F. Insulate coil headers located outside air flow as specified for piping. Refer to Division 23 Section “HVAC Piping Insulation.” G. Electric Duct Coils: Wire in accordance with NFPA 70. Refer to Division 26 Section “Equipment Wiring.” 3.2 TESTING A. After the entire installation is completed, ready for operation, test the systems. The Owner will provide electric current for the tests. Provide necessary labor, test pump, gauges, meters, other instruments and materials. Perform tests in the presence of the Architect. Dampers and fan speed controllers shall operate smoothly through their entire range. Unit shall operate without objectionable noise. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  3.3 CLEANING A. The entire system installations including apparatus, motors, inside of ducts, and other components, shall be left in first-class condition including cleaning, oiling and packing. B. Provide filters at system start-up. Replace filters after air systems have been adjusted and balanced. Provide the Owner with 1 additional set of filters for air handling units. 3.4 ADJUSTMENTS A. After completion of the installation work called for in this Specification, furnish necessary Mechanics or Engineers for the adjustment and operation of the plant, to the end that the plant may be perfectly adjusted and turned over to the Owner in perfect working order. Further instruct the Owner's authorized representative in the care and operation of the installation, providing required framed instruction charts, directions, and other relevant information and documentation. 3.5 NAMEPLATES, TAGS AND CHARTS A. Provide engraved plastic nameplates to identify equipment, controls, and other components. Refer to Division 23 Section “Duct Insulation.” Provide nameplates secured to each air handling unit indicating quantity and size of filters required. END OF SECTION 237200 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  SECTION 237416.11 PACKAGED ROOFTOP AIR-CONDITIONING UNITS WITH ENERGY RECOVERY (ERV) PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For each ERV. 1. Include manufacturer's technical data. 2. Include rated capacities, dimensions, required clearances, characteristics, and furnished specialties and accessories. B. Shop Drawings: 1. Include details of equipment assemblies. Indicate dimensions, weights, loads, required clearances, method of field assembly, components, and location and size of each field connection. 2. Include diagrams for power, signal, and control wiring. 1.3 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Operation and Maintenance Data: For ERV’s to include in emergency, operation, and maintenance manuals. 1.4 MAINTENANCE MATERIAL SUBMITTALS A. Furnish extra materials that match products installed and that are packaged with protective covering for storage and identified with labels describing contents. 1. Filters: One set(s) of filters for each unit. a. Merv-8 b. Merv-13 1.5 WARRANTY A. Special Warranty: Manufacturer agrees to repair or replace components of ERVs that fail in materials or workmanship within specified warranty period. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  1. Warranty Period for Compressors: Manufacturer's standard, but not less than five years from date of Substantial Completion. 2. Warranty Period for Control Boards: Manufacturer's standard, but not less than three years from date of Substantial Completion. 3. Parts and labor warranty: Shall not be less than one year from date of Substantial Completion. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 REFERENCES A. AFBMA 9 -Load Ratings and Fatigue Life for Ball Bearings. B. AMCA 99 -Standards Handbook C. AMCA 210 -Laboratory Methods of Testing Fans for Rating Purposes D. AMCA 500 -Test Methods for Louver, Dampers, and Shutters. E. AHRI 340/360 -Unitary Large Equipment F. NEMA MG1 -Motors and Generators G. National Electrical Code. H. NFPA 70 -National Fire Protection Agency. I. SMACNA -HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible. J. UL 900 -Test Performance of Air Filter Units. 2.2 MANUFACTURERS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following, providing they meet the project specifications: 1. Addison (basis of design) 2. Greenheck 3. Daikin 4. Trane 2.3 GENERAL A. The units shall be down discharge airflow. Cooling performance shall be rated in accordance with ARI testing procedures. All units shall be factory assembled, internally wired, fully charged with R-410A, and 100 percent run tested to check cooling operation, fan and blower rotation, and control sequence before leaving the factory. Wiring internal to the unit shall be colored and numbered for simplified identification. Units shall be ETL listed and labeled, classified in accordance to UL 1995. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  2.4 CASING A. Double wall design, constructed of G-90 galvanized steel, bonderized and pre-coated with a polyester pre-coat finish. 1. Top cover shall be a minimum of18-gage sheet metal with 2.0-in. thick, closed cell polyisocyanurate foam insulation with a 24-gage sheet metal interior liner. 2. Access panels and doors shall be a minimum of 20-gage sheet metal with 2.0-in. thick, closed cell polyisocyanurate foam insulation with a 24-gage sheet metal interior liner. Access doors shall be equipped with stainless steel hinges and quarter turn, adjustable, draw tight cam-action latches. 3. Corner and center posts shall be 16 or 18-gage galvanized steel. 4. Base pans shall be 16 or 18-gage galvanized steel. All openings through the base pan shall have upturned flanges at least 0.5 inches in height. 5. Base pans shall be insulated with 0.375-in. thick closed cell foam insulation. 6. Condensate pan shall be 20-gage stainless steel insulated with closed cell neoprene insulation. 7. Base rail shall be double flanged 12-gage galvanized steel or welded closed section structural steel tubing. 8. Roof sections shall be sloped for proper drainage. 9. Unit casing shall be capable of withstanding up to 2,500-hour salt spray exposure per ASTM B117. 10. Unit shall have insulated access doors, hinged for easy access to the controls compartment and all other areas requiring servicing. Each door shall seal against a triple edge co-extruded EPDM gasket to help prevent air and water leakage and for ease and safety during servicing. 11. Access doors shall include a thermal break. 12. Interior cabinet surfaces shall be lined with 24 gage galvanized steel. 13. Unit shall have a factory-installed sloped condensate drain connection fabricated of stainless steel with welded corners and drain connection. 14. Unit shall be equipped with fittings in frame rails to facilitate overhead rigging. 15. Filters shall be accessible through a hinged access panel. 16. The outdoor air opening shall have a factory provided hood with bird screen. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  2.5 CAPACITIES AND CHARACTERISTICS A. Refer to drawing schedules for information. B. Supply-Air Fan: 1. Supply Fan motor shall be direct drive type with factory installed Variable Frequency Drive or shall be EC motors. All motors shall be thermally protected. All indoor fan motors meet the U.S. Energy Policy Act of 2005 (EPACT). All Fans shall be mounted on rubber vibration isolators, to reduce the transmission of noise. C. Exhaust-Air Fan: 1. Powered Exhaust Fan motor shall be direct drive type with factory installed Variable Frequency Drive or shall be EC motors. All motors shall be thermally protected. All indoor fan motors meet the U.S. Energy Policy Act of 2005 (EPACT). All Fans shall be mounted on rubber vibration isolators, to reduce the transmission of noise. D. Energy recovery wheel: 1. The factory-installed enthalpy wheel shall be certified to meet the requirements of AHRI Standard 1060 and shall be AHRI listed. 2. The enthalpy wheel shall be constructed of corrugated synthetic fibrous media with a desiccant intimately bound and uniformly and permanently dispersed throughout the matrix structure of the media. 3. The desiccant material shall be molecular sieve, 4 angstrom or smaller. 4. The rotor shall be constructed of alternating layer of flat and corrugated media. 5. Wheel construction shall be fluted or formed honeycomb geometry so as to eliminate internal wheel bypass. 6. The wheel frames shall be evenly spaced steel spokes with a galvanized steel outer band and rigid center hub. 7. The wheel seals shall be full contact nylon brush type. 8. The wheel shall slide out of the cabinet side for service. 9. Wheel cassettes shall be constructed of galvanized steel. Cassettes shall have integral purge section. 10. The wheel bearings shall be inboard mounted permanently sealed roller bearings or externally flanged bearings. 11. The wheel shall be driven by a fractional horsepower AC motor via a multilink drive belt. 12. Energy wheel defrost control with factory provided VFD for energy wheel and air bypass shall be included. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  E. Supply-Air Refrigerant Coil: 1. The indoor coil section shall be installed in a draw through configuration, upstream of the supply air fan. The coil section shall be complete with a factory piped cooling coil and an ASHRAE 62.1 compliant double sloped drain pan. 2. The direct expansion (DX) cooling coils shall be internally finned, copper tubes mechanically bonded to a configured aluminum plate fin shall be standard. Coils shall be leak tested at the factory to ensure the pressure integrity. The evaporator coil shall be leak tested to 500 psig and pressure tested to 500 psig. A Stainless-Steel double-sloped condensate drain pan with provision for through the unit wall condensate drain is standard. Evaporator coil will have 6 interlaced rows for superior sensible and latent cooling. 3. Modulating Hot Gas Reheat: Shall consist of a modulating hot-gas reheat coil located on the leaving air side of the evaporator coil pre-piped and circuited with variable speed low ambient head pressure control. Refer to the Sequence of Operations section of the Installation, Operation and Maintenance manual for detailed unit control and operational modes. 4. Liquid Subcooling Coil: The unit could be equipped with a factory-installed liquid sub-cooling coil on all circuits. The coil shall be located immediately downstream of the evaporator coil. Coil circuit(s) shall be switchable. Operation of sub-cooling coil shall produce between 6 and 10° F. reheat. 5. Compressor: Digital Scroll Primary Circuit shall have direct-drive, hermetic, digital scroll type compressor on the lead circuit. Motor shall be suction gas-cooled and shall have a voltage utilization range of plus or minus 10 percent of unit nameplate voltage. Internal overloads shall be provided with the scroll compressors. Crankcase heaters shall be included. Compressor shall be able to fully modulate from 20%-100%. 6. Condenser: Air Cooled Variable Speed Head Pressure Control (Fin and Tube Coil) -Internally finned, copper tubes mechanically bonded to a configured aluminum plate fin shall be standard. Coils shall be leak tested at the factory to ensure the pressure integrity. The condenser coil shall be leak tested to 500 psig and pressure tested to 500 psig. The condenser coil shall have a fin design with slight gaps for ease of cleaning. 7. Outdoor Fans: Shall be direct drive vertical discharge design with low-noise corrosion resistant glass reinforced polypropylene props, powder coated wire discharge guards and electro-plated motor mounting brackets. Fans shall be statically and dynamically balanced. F. Hot Water Heat: Unit shall have a hot water coil, copper tube aluminum fin construction, with air vents installed downstream of the supply blower. Coil connection stubs will be located inside the unit cabinet. Hydronic control valves shall be field furnished. G. Controls and Safeties: 1. Microprocessor Controls: a. Unit can operate off of on board sensors or space sensor b. BACnet and Modbus. c. Shall provide a 5° F temperature difference between cooling and heating set points to meet ASHRAE 90.1, energy standard. d. Shall provide an alarm indicator and an audible alarm signal. e. Shall provide and display a current alarm list and an alarm history list. f. Compressor minimum run time (3 minutes) and minimum off time (5 minutes) shall be provided. g. Shall have service run test capability h. Shall have a service diagnostic mode. i. Minimum of 2 capacity stages (single circuit) or 3 capacity stages (dual circuit) of mechanical capacity control (excluding hot gas bypass) controlled with logic to maintain supply-air temperature set point. j. Unit shall be complete with self-contained low voltage control circuit. 2. Safeties: a. Unit shall incorporate a solid-state compressor lockout which provides optional reset capability at the space thermostat should any of the following safety devices trip and shut off compressor: 1) Compressor lockout protection provided for either internal or external overload. 2) Low-pressure protection. 3) Freeze protection (evaporator coil). 4) High-pressure protection. 5) Loss of charge protection. 6) Supply-air sensor shall be located in the unit and shall be used for compressor stage control. b. Unit shall be equipped with a supply fan status switch to protect the system in the event of a fan drive failure. H. Filters: 1. Filters: MERV-8 & MERV-13 2. Aluminum Mesh Filters shall be installed on the intake of the unit. In addition, one row of 2 inch MERV-8 rated prefilters (30 percent) and 4 inch MERV-13 final filter (95 percent) installed prior to the evaporator coil. Unit shall be equipped with a 6" filter rack upstream of the evaporator. Frame shall be field-adjustable to match any filter combination specified in the attached selection. I. ERV Electrical Characteristics for Single-Point Connection: 1. Electrical Options: Non-Fused Disconnect Switch w/115v Outlet 2. A 3-pole, molded case, HACR circuit breaker with provisions for through the base electrical connections shall be installed. The circuit breaker will be installed in the unit in a water tight enclosure. Wiring will be provided from the switch to the unit high voltage terminal block. The circuit breaker will be UL/CSA agency recognized. The circuit breaker will be sized per NEC and UL guidelines. A powered 120 volt, 10 amp, 2 plug convenience outlet shall be factory installed. A service receptacle disconnect shall be installed. The convenience outlet is powered from the line side of the circuit breaker, and therefore will not be affected by the position of circuit breaker. 2.6 Accessories: Condenser Hailguard A. Hail guards shall be installed on the outside of the condenser coil. The guards shall consist of perforated metal, of the same gauge and color as the unit itself. Airflow through the hail guards shall not be restricted due to location or size of the perforations. Guards shall be removable to accommodate coil cleaning. B. Provide dirty filter status switch with manual reset. Filter status switch shall be a pressure differential switch and will indicate dirty filter. The switch shall be factory installed. 2.7 ROOF CURBS A. Curb shall be formed of minimum 14-gage galvanized steel with wood nailer strip and shall be capable of supporting entire unit weight. See schedules for additional information. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 EXAMINATION A. Examine substrates, areas, and conditions, with Installer present, for compliance with requirements for installation tolerances and other conditions affecting performance of ERVs. B. Examine roughing-in for ERVs to verify actual locations of piping and duct connections before equipment installation. C. Examine roofs for suitable conditions where ERVs will be installed. D. Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected. 3.2 INSTALLATION A. Roof Curb: Install on roof structure or concrete base, level and secure, according to NRCA's “NRCA Roofing Manual: Membrane Roof Systems.” Install ERVs on curbs and coordinate roof penetrations and flashing with roof construction. Secure ERVs to upper curb rail, and secure curb base to roof framing or concrete base with anchor bolts. B. Install unit in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. C. Drain lines to be trapped and run full size from condensate drain connection to appointed drain location. Provide trap depth as required by unit manufacturer. 3.3 CONNECTIONS A. Comply with duct installation requirements specified in other HVAC Sections. Drawings indicate general arrangement of ducts. The following are specific connection requirements: 1. Install ducts to termination at top of roof curb. 2. Remove roof decking only as required for passage of ducts. Do not cut out decking under entire roof curb. 3. Connect supply ducts to ERVs with flexible duct connectors specified in Section 233300 “Air Duct Accessories.” 4. Install return-air duct continuously through roof structure. B. Install condensate drain, minimum connection size, with trap and indirect connection to nearest roof drain or area drain. C. Where installing piping adjacent to ERVs, allow space for service and maintenance. D. Install nameplate for each electrical connection, indicating electrical equipment designation and circuit number feeding connection. 1. Nameplate shall be laminated acrylic or melamine plastic signs as layers of black with engraved white letters at least 1/2 inch high. 2. Locate nameplate where easily visible. 3.4 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Manufacturer's Field Service: Engage a factory-authorized service representative to test and inspect components, assemblies, and equipment installations, including connections. B. Perform tests and inspections with the assistance of a factory-authorized service representative. C. Tests and Inspections: 1. After installing ERVs and after electrical circuitry has been energized, test units for compliance with requirements. 2. Inspect for and remove shipping bolts, blocks, and tie-down straps. 3. Operational Test: After electrical circuitry has been energized, start units to confirm proper motor rotation and unit operation. 4. Test and adjust controls and safeties. Replace damaged and malfunctioning controls and equipment. D. ERV will be considered defective if it does not pass tests and inspections. E. Prepare test and inspection reports. 3.5 STARTUP SERVICE A. Engage a factory-authorized service representative to perform startup service. 1. Complete installation and startup checks according to manufacturer's written instructions. 2. Inspect for visible damage to unit casing. 3. Inspect for visible damage to furnace combustion chamber. 4. Inspect for visible damage to compressor, coils, and fans. 5. Inspect internal insulation. 6. Verify that labels are clearly visible. Bid Pack No2 7. Verify that clearances have been provided for servicing. 8. Verify that controls are connected and operable. 9. Verify that filters are installed. 10. Clean condenser coil and inspect for construction debris. 11. Clean furnace flue and inspect for construction debris. 12. Connect and purge gas line. 13. Remove packing from vibration isolators. 14. Verify lubrication on fan and motor bearings. 15. Inspect fan-wheel rotation for movement in correct direction without vibration and binding. 16. Adjust fan belts to proper alignment and tension. 17. Start unit according to manufacturer's written instructions. a. Start refrigeration system. b. Do not operate below recommended low-ambient temperature. c. Complete startup sheets and attach copy with Contractor's startup report. 18. Inspect and record performance of interlocks and protective devices; verify sequences. 19. Operate unit for an initial period as recommended or required by manufacturer. 20. Adjust and inspect high-temperature limits. 21. Inspect outdoor-air dampers for proper stroke and interlock with return-air dampers. 22. Start refrigeration system and measure and record the following when ambient is a minimum of 15 deg F above return-air temperature: a. Coil leaving-air, dry-and wet-bulb temperatures. b. Coil entering-air, dry-and wet-bulb temperatures. c. Outdoor-air, dry-bulb temperature. d. Outdoor-air-coil, discharge-air, dry-bulb temperature. 23. Inspect controls for correct sequencing of heating, mixing dampers, refrigeration, and normal and emergency shutdown. 24. Measure and record the following minimum and maximum airflows. Plot fan volumes on fan curve. a. Supply-air volume. b. Return-air volume. c. Relief-air volume. d. Outdoor-air intake volume. 25. Simulate maximum cooling demand and inspect the following: a. Compressor refrigerant suction and hot-gas pressures. b. Short circuiting of air through condenser coil or from condenser fans to outdoor-air intake. 26. Verify operation of remote panel including pilot-light operation and failure modes. Inspect the following: a. High-temperature limit on gas-fired heat exchanger. b. Low-temperature safety operation. c. Filter high-pressure differential alarm. d. Economizer to minimum outdoor-air changeover. e. Smoke and firestat alarms. 27. After startup and performance testing and prior to Substantial Completion, replace existing filters with new filters. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  3.6 CLEANING AND ADJUSTING A. After completing system installation and testing, adjusting, and balancing ERV and air-distribution systems, clean filter housings and install new filters. 3.7 DEMONSTRATION A. Engage a factory-authorized service representative to train Owner's maintenance personnel to adjust, operate, and maintain ERVs. END OF SECTION 237416.11 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  SECTION 238126 SPLIT-SYSTEM AIR CONDITIONERS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SECTION INCLUDES A. Air Conditioning Units. B. Heat Pump Units. C. Controls and Control Panels. 1.2 REFERENCES A. ANSI/ASME -Boilers and Pressure Vessels Code. B. ANSI/NEMA 250 -Enclosures for Electrical Equipment (1000 Volts Maximum). C. ANSI/NFPA 90A -Installation of Air Conditioning and Ventilation Systems. D. UL -Underwriters' Laboratories. E. NFPA 70 -National Electric Code. 1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Manufacturer's Qualifications: Company specializing in manufacturing the Products specified in this Section with minimum 3 years’ experience. B. Installer Qualifications: Company specializing in performing the work of this Section with minimum 3 years’ experience. 1.4 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS A. Conform to ANSI/NFPA 90A for the installation of Computer Room air conditioning units. 1.5 SUBMITTALS A. Submit Shop Drawings and product data under provisions of Division 01 Section “Submittal Procedures.” B. Submit product data for manufactured products and assemblies required for this project. C. Indicate water, drain, electrical and refrigeration rough-in connections on Shop Drawings or product data. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  D. Submit manufacturer's installation instructions under provisions of Division 01 Section “Submittal Procedures.” 1.6 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE DATA A. Submit operation and maintenance data under provisions of Division 01 Section “Operation and Maintenance Data.” B. Include manufacturer's descriptive literature, operating instructions, installation instructions and maintenance and repair data. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 MANUFACTURERS A. Daikin. B. Trane -Mitsubishi. C. Fujitsu. 2.2 GENERAL A. The system to consist of a compact wall-mounted packaged evaporator section and matching air-cooled outdoor unit. B. The units shall be listed by Electrical Testing Laboratories (ETL) and bear the ETL label. C. Wiring shall be in accordance with the National Electrical Code (N.E.C.). D. The units shall be rated in accordance with ARI Standard 210 and bear the ARI label. E. A full charge of R-410A for refrigerant tubing shall be provided in the condensing unit. Tubing length shall be provided as required (coordinate with Drawings). A holding charge shall be provided in the evaporator. F. Unit shall be U.L. approved and shall bear a U.L. label. 2.3 INDOOR UNIT A. The indoor unit shall be completely factory assembled and wired. B. The casing shall have a white finish. C. The evaporator fan shall be a high performance, forward curve line flow fan direct driven by a single motor. The fan shall be statically and dynamically balanced and run on permanently lubricated bearings. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  D. An adjustable change vane shall be provided with the ability to direct the air flow from horizontal to vertical. An adjustable guide vane shall be provided to manually change the air direction from left to right. E. The evaporator coil shall be of nonferrous construction with smooth plate fins bonded to copper tubing. The tubing shall have inner grooves for high efficiency heat exchange. Tube joints shall be brazed with phoscopper or silver alloy. The coils shall be pressure tested at the factory. F. A condensate pan with drain shall be provided under the coil. G. A condensate pump shall be provided. The condensate pump shall fit within the evaporator housing and shall be completely concealed. The pump shall be supplied by the air conditioning unit manufacturer and shall be field installed in accordance with manufacturer’s recommendations. H. The unit shall be powered from the outdoor unit. See “Outdoor Unit” in this Section for more information. I. The unit shall include washable filters. 2.4 OUTDOOR UNIT A. The outdoor unit shall be completely factory assembled, piped, wired, and shall carry a complete refrigerant charge. B. The casing shall be fabricated of galvanized steel, bonderized and finished with baked enamel. C. The unit shall be furnished with a direct drive, propeller type fan arranged for horizontal discharge. D. The motor shall have inherent protection, be of the permanently lubricated type and resiliently mounted for quiet operation. E. The fan shall be provided with a raised wire guard to prevent contact with moving parts. F. The compressor shall be of the high-performance serviceable rotary type with crankcase heater, accumulator and internal thermal overloads. The compressor shall be internally isolated with rubber mounts so as to avoid the transmission of vibration. G. The refrigeration system shall have the capability to operate with a maximum height difference of 23 feet and overall refrigerant tubing length of 65 feet between indoor and outdoor sections without the need for line size changes, traps, or additional oil. Refrigerant flow from the condenser to be controlled by means of a capillary tube. H. The condenser coil shall be of nonferrous construction with smooth plate fins bonded to copper tubing. The tubing shall have inner grooves for high efficiency heat exchange. The coil shall be protected with an integral metal guard. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  I. The unit shall be controlled by the microprocessor located in the matching indoor unit. The outdoor unit shall have the ability to provide power for the matching indoor unit. The unit electrical power shall be as scheduled on the Drawings. J. The unit shall be capable of low ambient operation, with outside air temperature as low as 0°F (-17°C). K. Support: Provide roof or grade support, as required, to elevate unit a minimum of 24 inches above the surface. L. Heat Pump Units: The unit shall include valves and controls for automatic changeover from cooling to heating mode. 2.5 SYSTEM CONTROL A. The control system shall consist of two (2) microprocessors interconnected by a multi-wire cable. One microprocessor shall be factory wired and located within the indoor unit. It shall have the capability of sensing room temperature and indoor coil temperature; receive and process commands from the remote controller; and control the outdoor unit. Wireless remote controllers are not acceptable. B. The microprocessor within the wall-mounted remote monitor and controller shall display setpoint and room temperature; provide two (2) manually selected modes of cooling, normal and economy operation at 2 degrees F (1 degrees C) above setpoint; provide continuous or automatic start/stop of system operation; night setback operation of 4 degrees F (2 degrees C) above setpoint; and manual or automatic fan speed control. Automatic fan speed control shall be based upon the temperature difference between setpoint and room temperature maintaining lowest speed possible. C. When heating capability is specified, the wall-mounted controller shall provide manually selected modes of heating, and night setback operation of 4 degrees F (2 degrees C) below setpoint. 2.6 REFRIGERANT PIPING A. Unit shall be provided with pre-charged and pre-insulated line sets as recommended by the manufacturer. 2.7 WARRANTY A. The units shall have a manufacturer's warranty for a period of 1 year from date of Substantial Completion. B. The compressor shall have a warranty of 5 years from date of Substantial Completion. C. If any part fails to function properly during the warranty period due to defects in workmanship or material, it shall be replaced or repaired. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 EXAMINATION A. Verify that system is located per Drawings. B. Verify that proper power supply is available. 3.2 INSTALLATION A. Install units in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Mount rooftop air-cooled condensing units 24 in. (0.61 m) above the roof. C. Mount ground-mounted air-cooled condensing units 24 in. (0.61 m) above grade. D. Mount wall-mounted air-cooled condensing units using bracket furnished by the manufacturer, and provide supplemental supports as required. E. Install condensing units so the fan blows in the same direction as the prevailing winds, unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer. F. Provide recessed wall mounting box for mounting the wired indoor controller. Fasten the box to wall framing stud, masonry, or other suitable structural surface approved by the Architect; fastening to gypsum wallboard is not acceptable. Provide interconnecting low-voltage and line-voltage wiring and conduits, concealed unless otherwise indicated. Wall mounting box, wiring, and conduits shall be in accordance with the requirements of Division 26 – Electrical. END OF SECTION 238126 Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  SECTION 238200 CONVECTION HEATING UNITS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SECTION INCLUDES A. Baseboard Radiation. B. Cabinet Unit Heaters. 1.2 SUBMITTALS FOR REVIEW A. Division 01 Section “Submittal Procedures.” B. Product Data: Provide typical catalog of information including arrangements. C. Shop Drawings: 1. Indicate cross sections of cabinets, grilles, bracing and reinforcing, and typical elevations. 2. Submit schedules of equipment and enclosures typically indicating length and number of pieces of element and enclosure, corner pieces, end caps, cap strips, access doors, pilaster covers, and comparison of specified heat required to actual heat output provided. 3. Indicate mechanical and electrical service locations and requirements. 1.3 SUBMITTALS AT PROJECT CLOSEOUT A. Division 01 Section “Closeout Procedures”: Procedures for submittals. B. Project Record Documents: Record actual locations of components and locations of access doors in radiation cabinets required for access or valving. C. Warranty: Submit manufacturer warranty and ensure forms have been completed in Owner’s name and registered with manufacturer. D. Operation and Maintenance Data: Include manufacturer's descriptive literature, operating instructions, installation instructions, maintenance and repair data, and parts listings. Submit under provisions of Division 01 Section “Operation and Maintenance Data.” 1.4 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Manufacturer Qualifications: Company specializing in manufacturing the Products specified in this Section with minimum 3 years’ experience. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  1.5 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS A. Products Requiring Electrical Connection: Listed and classified by Underwriters Laboratories Inc., as suitable for the purpose specified and indicated. 1.6 EXTRA MATERIALS A. Division 01 Section “Closeout Procedures”: Maintenance Data. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 BASEBOARD RADIATION A. Manufacturers: 1. Sterling Hydronics. 2. Rittling. 3. Slant-Fin. 4. Vulcan. B. Heating Elements: Copper tubing mechanically expanded into flanged collars of evenly spaced aluminum fins, 1 tube end belled. C. Enclosure: Minimum 0.030 inch (0.75 mm) steel with back and top of one piece; front panel, end panel, end caps, corners, and joiner pieces to snap together, with front panel easily removable. Provide full length damper. D. Finish: Factory applied baked enamel of color as selected by the Architect on visible surfaces of enclosure and backplate. E. Element Brackets: 0.0516 inch (1.3 mm) galvanized steel to support from panel and noise free element cradle. F. Capacity: As scheduled, based on 65 degrees F (18 degrees C) entering air temperature. 2.2 BASEBOARD RADIATION, COMMERCIAL/INSTITUTIONAL GRADE A. Manufacturers: 1. Sterling Hydronics. 2. Vulcan. 3. Slant-Fin. 4. Rittling. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  B. Heating Elements: 3/4 inch ID seamless copper tubing, mechanically expanded into evenly spaced aluminum fins, suitable for soldered fittings. Galvanized steel slide cradles. C. Element Hangers: Quiet operating, ball bearing cradle type providing unrestricted longitudinal movement, on enclosure brackets. D. Enclosures: Slope-top, stamped-louvered, pencil-proof, 16-gauge steel, with easily jointed components for wall to wall installation. E. Backplate: 20-gauge steel, painted. Partial type, for use with ball-bearing hangers. Support rigidly on wall. Mount at manufacturer’s recommended height above floor. F. Finish: Factory applied baked enamel of color as selected by the Architect. 2.3 CABINET UNIT HEATERS A. Manufacturers: 1. Sterling Hydronics. 2. Beacon-Morris. 3. Dunham Bush. 4. McQuay. 5. Modine. 6. Price Industries. 7. Rittling. 8. Trane. B. Coils: Evenly spaced aluminum fins mechanically bonded to copper tubes, designed for 100 psi (1380 kPa) and 220 degrees F (104 degrees C). C. Cabinet: 0.0598 inch (1.5 mm) steel with exposed corners and edges rounded, easily removed panels, glass fiber insulation and integral air outlet and inlet grilles. D. Finish: Factory applied baked enamel of color as selected by the Architect on visible surfaces of enclosure or cabinet. E. Fans: Centrifugal forward-curved double-width wheels, statically and dynamically balanced, direct driven. F. Motor: Tap wound multiple speed permanent split capacitor or shaded pole with sleeve bearings, resiliently mounted. G. Control: Multiple speed switch, factory wired, located in cabinet. Barnstead School District, SAU 86  May 20, 2025  Barnstead K-8 School Additions & Renovations  TTG Proj No. 5199  Bid Pack No2  H. Filter: Easily removed 1 inch (25 mm) thick glass fiber throw-away type, located to filter air before coil. I. Capacity: As Scheduled, based on 65 degrees F (18 degrees C) entering air temperature. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 INSTALLATION A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Install equipment exposed to finished areas after walls and ceiling are finished and painted. Avoid damage. C. Protection: Provide finished cabinet units with protective covers during balance of construction. D. Baseboard Radiation: Locate on outside walls and run cover continuously wall-to-wall unless otherwise indicated. Where drawings show elements located under windows, install with elements centered under windows. Install end caps where units butt against walls. E. Finned Tube Radiation: Locate on outside walls and run cover wall-to-wall unless otherwise indicated. Where drawings show elements located under windows, install with elements centered under windows. Install wall angles where units butt against walls. F. Cabinet Unit Heaters: Install as indicated. Coordinate to assure correct recess size for recessed units. G. Hydronic Units: Provide with shut-off valve on supply and lockshield balancing valve on return piping. If not easily accessible, extend vent to exterior surface of cabinet for easy servicing. For cabinet unit heaters, fan coil units, and unit heaters, provide float operated automatic air vents with stop valve. 3.2 CLEANING A. After construction is completed, including painting, clean exposed surfaces of units. Vacuum clean coils and inside of cabinets. B. Touch-up marred or scratched surfaces of factory-finished cabinets, using finish materials furnished by manufacturer. END OF SECTION 238200 