Kilmarnock Building A 65 Kilmarnock St Boston, MA MEP/FP Building Systems Narrative Schematic Design May 14, 2025 Prepared for: PCAArchitects Table of Contents I INTRODUCTION....................................................................................................... 3 II PROJECT SUMMARY AND ASSUMPTIONS ........................................................... 3 III SUSTAINABLE STRATEGIES .................................................................................. 3 IV CONCEPTUAL DESIGN ........................................................................................... 4 A HVAC ................................................................................................................ 5 B ELECTRICAL .................................................................................................... 11 C PLUMBING ....................................................................................................... 22 D FIRE PROTECTION.......................................................................................... 30 I. INTRODUCTION The purpose of this Schematic Design Narrative is to describe the proposed MEP-FP systems, aid in the development of a budget, as well as describe the overall intent of the MEP-FP design for the project. In addition to the work described herein, include General Conditions, Supplementary General Conditions, Division 0, and all applicable parts of Division 1 for conditions and requirements that may affect the work involved for each trade. Examine all drawings including architectural drawings for requirements that affect work under each trade whether or not such work is specifically mentioned in this description. The intent of this document is to provide fully operational systems, including any and every required component to have a complete system. Applicable Codes and Standards shall include all State Laws, Local Ordinances, Utility Company Regulations and the applicable requirements of the accepted Codes and Standards. II. PROJECT SUMMARY AND ASSUMPTIONS The project consists of a new residential building, 6-story with (45) total apartment units and limited amenities spaces for patient family housing for Boston Children’s Hospital. The total square footage of the project is 40,500 sq/ft. The systems described in this report are based on the following program and building features: • Non-high-rise • All-electric MEP systems • LEED Gold certifiable, but not pursuing actual certification • Passive House compliance path per the Specialized Opt-In Stretch Energy Code III. SUSTAINABLE STRATEGIES A. Goals 1. Specific design and environmental sustainability goals as they relate to the mechanical, electrical, plumbing, and fire protection systems have been incorporated based upon the requirements of the US Green Building Council’s LEED® Rating System. 2. Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) is a nationally accepted green building rating system used to benchmark high performance buildings. Projects are awarded Certified, Silver, Gold, or Platinum certification depending on the number of credits they achieve. We understand that the Owner has targeted a LEED Silver certifiable rating based upon LEED-NC V4. 3. Specific design and environmental sustainability goals as they relate to the mechanical, electrical, plumbing, and fire protection systems have been incorporated based upon the requirements of the Passive House Institute US (PHIUS) Certification System. 4. The project will seek Passive House certification under the PHIUS+ 2021/2024 Multifamily program. B. Approach 1. MEP/FP System selections have been influenced by the following assumptions, aims, and issues: a. To provide a suitable and comfortable environment in the occupied spaces for the residents and visitors to the complex. b. To translate the above into cost-effective construction of reliable systems that can be easily maintained. c. To use minimum energy while maintaining these aims. d. To provide systems which are familiar to maintenance staff while respecting the above design goals. 2. As a result, efficient, environmentally friendly, and cost-conscious systems will be realized. C. Specific Sustainable Systems Proposed 1. Variable Refrigerant Flow (VRF) Systems – specify high efficiency units with excellent part load efficiency and high SEER & COP ratings. 2. Energy Recovery Ventilators – utilize 100% outside air units to pre-treat the building fresh air before it is supplied to the space by capturing waste heat and cooling from building exhaust systems. ERV’s also ensure accurate outside air volumes are delivered. 3. High efficiency filters – specify 85% to 90% filters (MERV 13) in central air handlers to improve indoor air quality 4. Variable Speed Drives – provide for all major equipment 5. Premium efficiency motors – specify premium efficiency motors for large HVAC fans and pumps. 6. ECM motors – specify electrically commutated motors (ECM’s) for smaller fans and pumps 7. LED lighting – since lighting can be the largest energy consuming system in the building, specify LED lighting to reduce energy consumption 8. Low flow plumbing fixtures – utilize low flow toilets, faucets, and shower fixtures to reduce potable water consumption and heating hot water system energy use. IV. CONCEPTUAL DESIGN A. HVAC 1. Codes and Standards: a. 780 CMR – Massachusetts State Building Code, 10th Edition b. 2021 International Building Code c. 2021 International Mechanical Code d. 225 CMR 23.00 -IECC 2021 with MA Stretch Code Amendments (in effect January 2023) e. Massachusetts Energy and Environmental Affairs (EEA) – MEPA Greenhouse Gas Emissions Policy and Protocol f. All local zoning and building laws and regulations. g. All applicable local codes, amendments, and ordinances. h. Applicability of Standards: United States of America National Construction Industry standards shall be used as a minimum except where more stringent requirements are included in the Design Criteria. Latest edition of each standard shall apply. 1) Air Moving and Conditioning Association (AMCA) 2) American National Standard Institute (ANSI) 3) Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Institute (ARI) 4) American Society of. Heating, Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) 5) American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) 6) Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors National Association (SMACNA) 7) Thermal Insulation Manufacturers Association (TIMA) 8) U.S. Green Building Council Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) 9) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 10) Underwriters Laboratories (UL) 11) Passive House Institute US (PHIUS) 2. Design Criteria a. Outdoor Design Conditions: 1) Summer: 88°F DB, 74°F WB 2) Winter: 0°F DB b. Indoor Design Conditions (Cooling): 1) Apartment Units: 75° F +/-2°F; less than 55% RH 2) Common Spaces: 75° F +/-2°F; less than 55% RH 3) Electrical Rooms: 85° F +/-10°F 4) Other Mech. Rooms: Ventilation only, for 10°F rise above ambient c. Indoor Design Conditions (Heating): 1) Apartment Units: 72° F +/-2°F; no added humidification 2) Common Spaces: 72° F +/-2°F; no added humidification 3) Electrical Rooms: 50° F minimum 4) Other Mech. Rooms: 50° F minimum d. Mechanical Air Filtration 1) MERV 8 and MERV 13 (80-90%) for ventilation units 2) MERV 8 (30-35%) for all other units e. Mechanical Ventilation: 1) Fresh Air -per PHIUS, ASHRAE 62.1-2010, ASHRAE 62.2-2013, and IMC 2021, ventilation rate procedure. Note that all spaces, including the dwelling units, shall be mechanically ventilated. 2) Exhaust Rates: a) Residential Bathrooms: 25-cfm continuous b) Residential Kitchens: 50-cfm continuous c) Public Toilet Rooms: 75-cfm per fixture d) Janitor, Trash, Recycle: 15 ACH f. LEED Requirements: refer to LEED NC-V4 MEP Requirements and LEED Scorecard 3. HVAC for Apartments, Corridors, Common Areas and Amenity Spaces a. Each apartment shall be served by wall-mounted indoor units within each dwelling unit connected to central outdoor variable refrigerant flow (VRF) heat pumps. Studios are served by a single indoor unit; 1BR apartments are served by two indoor units; and 2BR apartments are served by three indoor units. Capacities and quantities for the apartments shall depend on the size, location, and exposure of each apartment unit, and will generally range as follows: 1) Studio: (1) 0.5-ton wall-mounted FCU 2) 1BR: (1) 0.5-ton wall-mounted FCU in bedroom and (1) 0.66-ton wall-mounted FCU in living room 3) 2BR: (1) 0.5-ton wall-mounted FCU in bedroom, (1) 0.66-ton wall-mounted FCU in corner bedroom, and (1) 0.66-ton wall-mounted FCU in living room b. The corridors and Amenity spaces shall be heated and cooled by the same VRF heat pump systems and consist of multiple indoor PEFY ceiling concealed ducted units with high static option. Fan coil condensate shall be piped to clear water waste receptors provided by the plumbing contractor. c. Basis of design for the VRF system shall be Mitsubishi high efficiency model PURY-EP Heat Recovery heat pumps. Provide three (3) 18-ton VRF outdoor units, complete with branch circuit controllers, and interconnecting refrigerant piping. Branch circuit controllers shall be mounted in mechanical rooms or above corridor ceilings on each level with an access panel. Outdoor units shall be located at the roof level on 24” tall stands. d. Provide manufacturer’s wall-mounted thermostat with large screen display for each fan coil unit. All thermostats shall be DDC and integrated into the central building management system (BMS). The VRF system shall be furnished with a touchscreen central controller, which shall be integrated into the BMS. 4. Apartments, Corridors and Amenity Ventilation Spaces a. Basis of Design Unit Ventilation -each apartment unit shall be provided with an energy recovery ventilator (ERV) with sensible recovery effectiveness of at least 78%, equal to Lifebreath MAX-XTR. The ERV shall be located in the bathroom and provided with a 30” x 36” access panel. 1) All units shall be complete with direct drive EC motor supply and exhaust fans, MERV 13 filtration, energy recovery core, and wall mounted 20/40/60 timed boost controller. 2) The ERV shall continuously exhaust the bathroom(s) and kitchen area while providing fresh air to each living space and each bedroom. 3) A ceiling radiation damper shall be provided at each ceiling penetration which is part of the rated floor/ceiling assembly. 4) The unit shall be ducted to the exterior wall utilizing combination intake/exhaust wall vents equal to Reversomatic. Separation is not required between intake air openings and living space exhaust air openings of an individual dwelling unit or sleeping unit where an approved factory-built intake/exhaust combination termination fitting is used to separate the air streams in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. b. The corridors and Amenity spaces shall be provided with an ERV equal to Lifebreath MAX-XTR as mentioned previously. The corridor on each floor shall be provided with an ERV. The Amenity spaces shall be provided with multiple ERVs to satisfy ventilation requirements and sensible recovery effectiveness requirements. Each ERV shall be located above the ceiling and provided with a 30” x 36” access panel. The unit shall be ducted to the exterior wall utilizing wind-drive rain louvers or intake and exhaust wall caps equal to XVent or Seiho model SFX. c. Constant flow regulators shall be used at all supply and exhaust registers connected to the ERV to aid in balancing. 5. Fuel Oil and Engine Exhaust Systems for Generator a. A diesel fuel oil storage tank, pump set, and piping distribution system with leak detection shall be provided at the level 1. Main storage tank will be UL 2085 listed double wall, 5-psig rated, with a capacity of approximately 300-gallons. Tank shall be Highland or equal. Pump set shall be Viking or Preferred Utilities. b. Fuel oil lines will be schedule 80, socket welded black steel piping with 300-lb valves and fittings. Piping will run within a double wall containment conduit from the diesel tank room to the generator at the roof. Leak detection panel and monitoring shall be tied into the BMS. c. The fuel oil room will be heated with electric unit heaters with integral thermostats where necessary and shall be exhausted with inline fans exhausted through louvers with insulated plenums and motorized dampers. Makeup air will be provided to the space through louvers with insulated plenums and motorized dampers. 6. Common Laundry Rooms a. Each floor laundry room shall be provided with a manifolded dryer exhaust system with a common stack to roof in a 2-hour rated shaft enclosure. Provide a single 880-cfm dryer exhaust fan, 1-hp, with VFD and duct static pressure control system on the roof assuming 2 dryers per floor and stacked rooms. The dryer exhaust from each dryer will be sub-ducted into the main common riser with a 22” tall steel duct. Central laundry rooms are located on level 5 and level 6, and each dryer is assumed to be 220-cfm. Provide an inline lint collector to be located on the roof near the dryer exhaust fan. b. The dryer exhaust fan shall be on standby power. The fan shall operate continuously but at variable speed based on dryer demand. Provide current switches at each dryer. When all dryers are OFF, the exhaust fan shall idle at its lowest possible speed setting to maintain upward airflow in the common exhaust stack. c. Make-up air shall be ducted from a sidewall intake within each laundry room to a plenum service wall behind the dryers. Provide motorized damper and backdraft damper at the intake duct. Interlock the intake damper at each level to the respective dryer current switches. The plenum space shall be minimally heated with a unit heater to prevent freezing. d. Provide a local VRF fan coil unit for heating and cooling in each laundry room. 7. Miscellaneous Heating and Ventilating Systems a. Provide 2-ton split system cooling units for each of the main telephone & data rooms and main electrical rooms. Outdoor unit shall be located at the roof level b. Vestibules, entryways, and stairwells will be heated with electric cabinet unit heaters. Heaters will be wall or ceiling mounted depending on the architectural configuration of the spaces. c. Mechanical spaces, plumbing rooms, electrical closets, and small telephone & data rooms will be heated with electric unit heaters with integral thermostats where necessary and will be exhausted through the ERV described previously. d. Trash/Recycle Rooms and Janitor’sClosets shallbe exhausted with aminimum of 15 air changes per hour. Ductwork will extend to sidewall or roof mounted exhaust fans. Fans as manufactured by Grenheck, Cook, or Twin City. e. Each elevator hoistway will be ventilated with a louver and motorized damper located at the top of the overrun of each elevator per MA elevator code, 524 CMR on 24” tall stands. 35.00 for hoistway temperature control. In addition, each elevator machine room will be provided with a 2.0-ton split system heat pump for heating and cooling per MA elevator code, 524 CMR 35.00. Outdoor unit shall be located at the roof level on 24” tall stands. 8. Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing a. All HVAC systems (hydronic, air) shall be balanced by the Contractor. All testing shall be in accordance with NEBB or AABC National Standards. A written report shall be submitted for review. b. All HVAC systems shall be tested and found tight. Any leaks developed shall be corrected prior to Owner's acceptance of the new systems. All ductwork shall be pressure tested per SMACNA standards. All apartment unit ductwork shall be pressure tested to PHIUS standards. All ERV ductwork shall be pressure tested per SMACNA standards. 9. Commissioning a. This project shall be completely commissioned with the participation of the following parties: 1) Owner Representative 2) Commissioning Agent 3) Construction Manager 4) Sub-Trade Representatives 5) T&B Contractor 6) ATC/DDC Contractor 7) VRF system manufacturer 8) PHIUS Verifier b. Factory trained and certified technician shall startup, test, and commission the VRF systems, provide commissioning report, and provide manufacturer’s full 10-year warranty. 10. Automatic Temperature Controls: a. Provide a direct digital control (DDC) building management system (BMS) to control all HVAC systems in the building. The VRF central controller and expansion (add-on) devices shall be used for this purpose. b. System shall be native BACnet with web-based interface and shall be integrated with BCH’s control vendor ENE Systems. c. BACnet interface shall be provided for major standalone units. d. The control system shall consist of all thermostats, temperature transmitters, controllers, automatic valves and dampers, damper operators, switches, control panels, and other accessory equipment along with a complete system of electrical wiring to fill the intent of the specification and provide for a complete and operable system. All control equipment shall be proportioning, except as noted otherwise. e. Provide all interlocking wiring. f. Provide all thermostats and interlocking wiring to 120V controls for cabinet unit heaters, unit heaters, etc. 11. HVAC Outline Specifications: a. Piping 1) Refrigerant piping shall be Type ACR with brazed fittings. 2) Make proper provisions for expansion and contraction in all parts of piping systems wherever possible by means of pipe bends, pipe offsets, swing connections or changes in direction of piping. 3) Refrigerant piping shall be pressure tested per the VRF manufacturer’s strict installation guidelines. b. Sheet Metal Ductwork 1) All sheet metal shall be G90 galvanized steel and shall be stiffened by cross breaking and by use of galvanized rolled steel angles as required by SMACNA for its respective static pressure class. 2) Low pressure ductwork shall be SMACNA 2” w.g. pressure rated (all other ductwork systems) 3) All ductwork shall be 24 gauge or heavier. 4) All ERV ductwork shall be provided with AeroSeal or similar interior duct sealant. 5) Flexible ductwork in the apartments shall be limited to 12-ft lengths. c. Insulation 1) Duct Insulation: all interior supply ductwork and concealed return ductwork shall be insulated with 2” thick, 1.0 pound per cubic foot fiberglass wrap. In addition, ductwork in mechanical rooms shall be insulated with 2” thick fiberglass board. All exteriorductwork shallbeinsulated with 3” thick fiberglass board with heavy-duty EPDM jacket. 2) Pipe Insulation: Condensate piping shall be 1” thick fiberglass with ASJ. Refrigerantlinesetsshallbeinsulatedwith3/4”thick closed-cell foam Armaflex insulation. Outdoor piping shall be jacketed. d. Vibration Isolation 1) Noise and vibration isolation systems shall be provided to prevent the transmission of excessive structure borne noise or vibration to critical and non.critical areas of the building as characterized by noise criteria levels. Vibration isolators shall be equal to Mason Industries or Kinetics. 2) All fans, VRF units, and rooftop air handling units shall be equipped with vibration isolation springs and all piping within the mechanical rooms shall be hung with hangers equipped with spring vibration isolators. e. Submittals 1) Provide testing and documentation in accordance with project requirements for LEED submission to achieve the target score indicated in NC-V4 MEP REQUIREMENTS and LEED Scorecard. 2) Submit for approval product data for all HVAC and Automatic Temperature Control equipment. 3) All equipment shall be identified and tagged according to BCH standards. 4) Submit coordination drawings (1/4”scale), electronic and hardcopy, for review. The HVAC subcontractor shall compare his specifications and any drawings with those of other Trades as well as the Architectural drawings and specifications and report any discrepancies between them to the Architect and obtain from the Architect written instructions for changes necessary in the HVAC work. All work shall be installed in cooperation with other Trades installing interrelated work. Before installation, This Subcontractor shall make proper provisions to avoid interference in a manner approved by the Architect. All changes required in the HVAC work caused by this Subcontractor's neglect, shall be made by him at his own expense, to the Architect's satisfaction. This Subcontractor must include in his bid sufficient dollar amounts to coordinate the work of this Contract. This project may require additional time to coordinate all Trades. This requirement shall include, but not be limited to, producing the coordination drawings, as many times and as many drawings as required, to ensure serviceability of equipment, as approved by the Owner. 5) Submit installation, operation, and maintenance manuals for all equipment and systems. 6) Submit record documents, including as-built drawings. B. ELECTRICAL 1. Electric Service: a. Electrical service for the building will be provided from Utility via a pad-mounted transformer. The Utility owned transformer for the building shall be located at a location approved by the Utility Company. Utility power distribution to be designed by Eversource. Assume primary distribution system with electric manholes, and a primary PME-9 switch. b. The location for the service entrance conductors will be at the point near the main electric room. The final location of the equipment and the utility requirements shall be coordinated with the Electric Utility Company. c. The tenants of the residential dwelling units will not be billed for utility usage. The building with assume all energy consumption for the building, therefore no meter centers or customer sub-metering is required for dwelling units. d. Provide (6) 4”C PVC in concrete encased underground secondary ductbank between the utility pad-mounted transformer to the building main switchboard. e. The service will be a 2500A 208Y/120 volt, 3-phase, 4-wire (6) parallel sets of 4#750 KCMIL Copper – low smoke zero halogen in 6-4”ductbank to building main electrical room. Secondary services shall be routed in an underground concrete encased duct banks system from the transformer to the Main Switchboards (SWBD). Additional set(s) of conductors may be required when the distance exceeds a hundred feet. Allow 90 degree C termination lugs at both ends of the cables. f. If a fire pump becomes required, a second electric service will need to be provided as well. 2. Switchboard “MSWBD” a. Switchboard “MSWBD” shall be rated for 2500A, 208Y/120 volt, 3-phase, 4-wire, service entrance rated, front access only, rear aligned main switchboard group mounted type construction with integral bus mount SPD surge protection, CT compartment 100kAIC @240V. b. The Switchboard “MSWBD” serve the amenity spaces, house loads and residential units The 2500A main breaker and feeder breaker 1200A or greater shall be insulated case type, feeder breakers under 1200A shall be molded case type. c. The switchboard shall consist of the minimum following sections. All circuit breakers used as service point shall be 100% rated: 1) Section 1: Pull section and 2500A main breaker section along with CT Compartment and with digital customer metering and SPD surge protection 2) Section 2: One (1) 1200AF/1200AT circuit breaker serving Residential Riser. One (1) 225A Circuit breakers and One (1) prepared space for 225A future breakers. 3) Section 3: A 1200AF/1200AT circuit breaker for house loads.400A-3P circuit breaker to serve the optional standby power HVAC loads. 150A-3P circuit breaker to serve Legally required standby power distribution panel and (1) 150A-3P circuit breaker to serve Emergency power distribution panel. 4) Section 4: House distribution section with circuit breakers serving house power and lighting panels. Also include circuit breaker for solar input, assume 250A/3P circuit breaker. The board shall be capable of meeting code required renewable source injection point. Refer to the Electrical Normal Power Distribution, lighting system sections and carry all circuit breakers to support panels and/or loads indicated. The building will be an all-electric building, allow three (2) 225A/3P circuit breakers along with hundred feet of cable/conduit for major HVAC/Plumbing equipment. 5) A single Utility meter will be provided to encompass building 6) A Power System Studies shall be provided by the contractor for the complete electrical system distribution equipment including calculations for available short circuit at each board; arc flash analysis. 3. Generator Electrical System a. A 200kW/250kVA, 208/120V, 3-ph, 4-wire diesel fueled generator shall serve all the emergency life-safety, legally required, and optional standby loads in the building. The new generator shall be installed at the roof level on 3 feet tall dunnage along with an access platform in a walk-in weatherproof, sound attenuated enclosure meeting Boston sound level ordinance requirements The generator shall have a radiator mounted load bank installed within the enclosure. Include 800AF/700AT 100% rated circuit breakers with LSIGA electronic trip unit at generator to serve transfer switches. Circuit breaker shall be capable of fully coordinating with downstream protective devices. b. Provide a 250A circuit breaker for radiator mounted load bank (load bank shall be sized at 30% of the generator power capacity). Review structural reinforcement requirements with the structural engineer for cost impact. The generator shall be reviewed and be approved for installation by the local and federal EPA and meet all applicable regulations including any site emissions limitation. c. Include manual transfer switch including Kirk Key system on breakers served from permanent as well as Remote generator Connection Box. d. Allow a remote Emergency Shut-Off Buttons (EPO) to completely de-energize the generator, EPO shall be located per Local Fire Department direction. e. Coordinate with engine manufacturer and HVAC section for requirement of generator flue pipe and ventilation/combustion air, allow all required material including critical grade silencer, vibration isolations, concrete pad, noise reduction apparatus where required. f. The following loads shall be connected to the Optional standby power system: 1) VRF heating and cooling systems, including miscellaneous electric unit heaters 2) HVAC for Level 1 amenities space 3) 50% of receptacles in Level 1 amenities space 4) (1) Receptacle within each dwelling unit 5) (1) Lighting fixture within each dwelling unit 6) Cooling and telecommunications equipment for MDF 7) Cooling for elevator machine rooms 8) BMS 9) The generator calculation does not include any electric water heaters g. The following loads shall be connected to the Legally required standby power system: 1) Elevator and associated sump pump. 2) Generator fuel pump. h. The following loads shall be connected to the Emergency power system: 1) Lighting designated as emergency shall be connected to generator to maintain a minimum 90-minute capacity during prolonged power outage. i. A 150A, 208/120V, 3-ph, 3-pole automatic transfer switch “ATS-ELEV” shall be provided to serve elevators and elevator related systems. A 150A, 208/120V, 3.ph, electrical panel (ELEVP-PH) will be provided to distribute power to elevator. j. An 150A, 208/120V, 3-ph, 3-pole automatic transfer switch “ATS-LS” with bypass isolation shall be provided shall be provided to serve emergency load. A 150A, 208/120V, 3-ph, electrical panel will be provided to distribute power to emergency load k. An 600A, 208/120V, 3-ph, 3-pole automatic transfer switch “ATS-OS” shall be provided shall be provided to serve optional standby load. (2) 150A, MLO, 208/120V, 3 phase, 4 wire single tub (60-pole) electrical panel shall be located on the 2nd, and 5th floor electrical rooms to serve dwelling optional standby load (receptacle and lighting). l. A 600A, 208/120V, 3-ph, distribution panel will be provided to distribute optional standby power to mechanical equipment to be located in the penthouse mechanical room. m. A 150A, MLO, 208/120V, 3 phase, 4 wire single tub (60-pole) electrical panel shall be located on the 2nd, and 5th floor electrical rooms to serve and miscellaneous receptacle and lighting for residential units on standby power. n. All normal legs of transfer switches in the main emergency room shall be served from the top floor normal power switchboard ‘MSWBD’. All circuit breakers shall be over-sized frame with LSIG electronic trip unit to satisfy the selective coordination settings. The system shall be fully coordinated from time 0.1 second. 4. Electrical Normal Power Distribution a. A 400A, MLO, 208/120V, 3 phase, 4 wire with SPD two tub (120-pole) distribution panel shall be located on the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th floor electrical rooms to serve dwelling unit. b. Normal power and lighting panelboards shall be tin-plated aluminum bus with door in door type trims, molded case circuit breaker types: 1) Assume a 225A MCB, 208Y/120V, 3-phase, 4-wire, 60-circuit panelboard located in the main electrical room. Additionally, assume a 125A MCB, 208Y/120V, 3-phase, 4-wire, 60-circuit panelboard located in the top-floor electrical rooms, both panels will serve lighting circuits. 2) Assume two 225A MCB, 208Y/120V, 3-phase, 4-wire, 60-circuit panelboards. These panels will be located in the main and top-floor electrical rooms, designated for HVAC and power systems. 3) All 208V panelboards within the main electric room shall be assumed to be 100kAIC@208V unless the actual project dedicated short circuit study indicates otherwise. c. All equipment installed exposed in unheated space or the exterior shall be minimum NEMA 3R rated. d. Refer to HVAC, Plumbing, Fire Protection, Architectural, Civil documentation for equipment requiring electrical power. e. The energy code requires a power monitoring system to monitor interior lighting, exterior lighting, plug loads and HVAC loads separately. The system should be provided and be capable of automatically reporting to the State agency. 5. Individual Residential Apartment: a. Each residential dwelling apartment will be served by the electrical distribution panel on the respective floor. b. A combination of arc-fault type breakers and dual-function arc-fault and ground-fault type breakers shall be provided as required by Code. c. All dryers in laundry areas; electric ranges, wall ovens and cooktops within 6’ of kitchen sink; and exterior remote condensing units shall have ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection provided at the circuit breaker. d. Assume apartment dwelling tamper resistant receptacles on 10’ to 12’ spacings density in all areas required by Code along with bathroom/kitchen counter GFCI receptacles and appliances. A maximum 6’ from the door opening or other code required spacing shall be fully met. e. Assume apartment dwelling switched permanent lighting at apartment entry foyers, kitchens, hallways, bathrooms, utility closets, dining rooms with decorative Energy Star compliant residential style LED light fixtures. Assume bedrooms and living rooms will have switched receptacle outlets for plug-in lamps. 6. Lighting and Controls: a. Provide controls to meet the 2021 IECC and LEED requirements, such as: occupant sensor controls, time-switch controls, light-reduction controls, and Page 16 daylight-responsive controls. All offices will be provided with vacancy sensor switches; storage rooms, public toilet rooms, and janitor’s closets will be provided with occupancy sensor switches. Common spaces and amenity spaces will be provided with vacancy sensors and local dimming controls. b. Stairwell light fixtures will be LED, DLC qualified with integral occupancy dimming controls. Lights will dim to 50% output when the space is unoccupied. c. Exit signs shall be battery type and emergency battery lighting units throughout the interior and exterior of the building for life-safety egress lighting and in areas required per Code. d. Signage, exterior and interior lighting, residential apartment lighting will be designed by the Architect, lighting designer and landscape consultant. e. A networked lighting control relay panel with exterior photocell will be provided to control common spaces and exterior lighting. f. Common corridors will be provided with ceiling occupancy sensor with dimming capabilities to dim light fixtures to 50% output when the space is not occupied. When occupancy sensors are triggered, the light fixtures shall ramp up to full brightness. 7. Common Areas/Amenities Power: a. Power to all common area miscellaneous power needs shall be provided from the house panelboards. b. Common areas, lobby and amenities will have at least one (1) tamper resistant duplex receptacle on every usable wall/desk/amenity electrified equipment space, with at least one receptacle at 30’ spacings along corridors for housekeeping usage. c. Use tamper resistant GFCI receptacles for back of house areas, damp locations, kiosks, vending machines, etc. d. Use tamper resistant and weather resistant GFCI receptacles with while-in use covers for exterior locations. e. Receptacles in these areas shall be provided with control options to be controlled by motion sensors or time clock. f. 50% of receptacles and all HVAC serving the multi-purpose room will be connected to optional standby generator power. 8. Photovoltaic Electrical System a. The photovoltaic system design shall be provided by a photovoltaic consultant. b. For the purpose of pricing, provide (1) 400A-3P back-feed circuit breaker per building in the main switchboard MSBD. All net metering shall be designed by the photovoltaic consultant. c. Provide 4#600kcmil&1#4G-4”C, XHHW-2 (CU) between MSWBD and building’s top floor electrical room. 9. Fire Alarm System: a. Fire alarm system shall be an addressable fire alarm system that complies with 780CMR and NFPA 72 requirements. The system shall include, but not limited to: Fire Alarm Control Panel, digital dialer, cellular modem, rotating beacon, remote annunciator panel, double-action manual pull-stations, photoelectric smoke detectors, fix-temp/rate-of-rise heat detectors, monitoring of building fire protection system flow, tamper and pressure switches, duct smoke detection, notification appliances, etc. b. The fire alarm system will be monitored by a central station via cellular and UDACT dial out for alarm, supervisory and trouble conditions conforming with NFPA 72 as well as local fire department requirements. c. A rotating red beacon and key repository box will be located at an exterior location approved by the local Fire Department. d. Manualpull stations willbelocated within 5’ofall egressexitdoors andallstairwell entrances on each floor. e. Fire alarm notification appliances shall be combination type horn/ADA strobes located throughout all areas including, but not limited to common corridors, mechanical rooms and other similar common spaces. Assume corridor and public areas horn/ADA strobes at maximum 40’ spacing. Assume horn/strobe (110cd) every 45’ unless there are areas require additional devices for proper coverage. f. System type smoke detectors will be provided throughout all corridors, stairwells, elevator machine room and lobbies, electric rooms, and telecommunication rooms for early warning purposes. Heat detectors shall be provided in janitor’s closets and mechanical rooms to avoid nuisance alarms. All electrical and communication rooms will have smoke detectors. g. Duct smoke detection systems will be provided for HVAC air handling units producing greater than 2000cfm on the supply and return side. The system shall consist of system type photoelectric smoke detector and duct housing, equipment shut-down relay, sampling tube and key switched remote test station. h. The fire alarm system will monitor the pull stations, smoke detectors, heat detectors, sprinkler system flow and tamper switches and duct smoke detectors. Signaling line circuits shall be Class ‘A’ and the notification appliance circuits shall be Class ‘A’. i. The activation of a manual pull station or an initiating device will activate the building fire alarm notification devices and will transmit an addressable “alarm” signal to the fire alarm control panel and annunciator panel. j. The system shall be provided with a battery back-up rated for a minimum of 24 hours stand-by and 15 minutes alarm backup capacity. k. Early warning carbon monoxide detectors with local sounder bases will be installed in rooms containing fossil fuel burning equipment, or open to area served from equipment with fossil fuel burning equipment. Activation of the carbon monoxide detector will initiate a local temporal 4 audible alarm at the sounder base and for hearing impaired units it will transmit a carbon monoxide alarm condition to the UL central station. This sequence shall be coordinated with the local fire department prior to installation and programming of the system. l. HVAC combination Fire/Smoke Damper that serves the corridor will interface with the fire alarm system to be controlled by the corridor smoke detectors. Fire/Smoke Dampers that do not serve the corridor will interface with the fire alarm system to be controlled by the smoke detector located within the same room as the combination Fire/Smoke Damper or via duct-mounted smoke detector. m. System fire alarm in apartment dwellings: 1) Group 1 and Group 2 Units (NFPA 72 – Chapter 29): a) The fire alarm system notification audible appliance device will be 520Hz low frequency horn type per NFPA 72 in each bedroom and common area for fire alarm general alarm generating minimum 75 dBA at pillow. b) System connected audible 520Hz low frequency notification devices will be located within the living room and each bedroom. c) Local audible multi-station 120V type with battery back-up smoke alarms will be located in each bedroom. System-connected detectors with means to activate the respective unit notification devices only are also acceptable. This option may require multiple power supplies and amplifiers at fire alarm headend to support multiple notification events at the same time. The system shall be capable of generating separate CO and Fire alarm notification signals per code requirements. d) Local audible multi-station 120V type with battery back-up combination smoke/CO alarms will be located within 10’ outside the vicinity of the bedrooms. See above for alternative system connected option. 2) Group 2A Hearing-Impaired Units (NFPA 72 – Chapter 18): a) The fire alarm system notification visual (strobe only) appliance device will type per NFPA 72 in each bedroom, common area and in each bathroom activated by fire alarm general alarm and local alarm. b) System connected but locally audible 520Hz low frequency notification devices along with system type smoke detectors will be located in each bedroom. The notification devices including strobes (177 cd) will also get activated during an event of a building alarm. c) System connected but locally audible 520Hz low frequency notification devices along with system type combination smoke/CO detector will be located within 10’ outside the vicinity of the bedrooms. The notification devices will also get activated during an event of a building alarm. A system connected notification device shall be provided in each living room. d) Activation of any detector within the dwelling unit will activate the 520Hz low frequency alarm via the audio and visual devices within the dwelling unit and shall not ring the general alarm. e) A Doorbell system along with in-unit audio and visual notification devices and bed shaker shall be provided to notify the occupants in Hearing Impaired units. The system should also be capable of getting input from the fire alarm system and landline/personal phone/cellphone to notify the hearing-impaired tenants. The system should be similar to Bellman. 10. Telecommunications Systems a. Provide three (4) 4”C telecommunication ductbank for utility services from a utility connection point on the street to the main distribution frame (MDF) room. b. Utility services will be configured to accept a minimum of two service providers (i.e., Xfinity/Comcast and Verizon). c. The MDF room will be provided with a 20” min. wide x 4” min. high x .” thick copper main telecom ground bar. A #4/0 AWG green insulated ground telecommunications bonding conductor in a 1” EMT conduit will be provided to the building’s main electric service ground bar. Telecommunications bonding backbone will be provided to the stacked IDF telecom ground bars. Provide minimum three (3) 4”C pathway with pull rope between the MDF to the IDF rooms/closets. Assume two IDF rooms/closets on each floor (North and South) d. The intermediate distribution frame (IDF) will be stacked and located on each floor and will be provided with a 10” min. wide x 2” min. high x .” thick copper telecom ground bar. A #2 AWG green insulated ground telecommunications bonding conductor in a 1” EMT conduit will be provided to the main ground bus bar at the MDF room. Provideminimumthree(3)4”sleevesbetween thestackedIDFrooms. e. Provide telecommunication bonding backbone in accordance with ANSI/TIA 607.B. f. MDF, IDFs and IT room will be provided with 8’ high x 8’ min. wide x .” thick fire-resistant plywood backboard. Minimum of four (4) 20A quad receptacles to be provided on the backboard. g. A single mode fiber cable (containing a minimum of 12 strands of fiber) and (4) CAT6 cables will be provide between the MDF and the Building’s IT room to support landlord owned devices in amenities. h. The Building’s IT room will be provided with a server wall mounted rack for necessary building sub-networks. All active electronics and head-end equipment to be provided by Owner. i. Common areas, offices, amenity spaces, lobbies, lounges, fitness center, courtyards, wireless access points (WAP), to receive the coax cable; RG6 up to 150’ and RG11 up to 300’ at TVs and each fitness cardio equipment, and two (2) CAT6A cabling for data to each office workstation and WAP. j. CAT6A cabling data/voice drops will be provided to the following equipment: Building Management System (BMS), Elevator machine rooms, fire alarm control panel, elevator two-way communication system, lighting control panel, security and access control panel, electric vehicle charging stations, package room concierge system, etc. k. Infrastructure cabling will be provided between the floor IDF room to each media panel with (1) 1” Microduct for fiber, (1) coax cable; RG6 up to 150’ and RG11 up to 300’, and (1) CAT6A cabling. l. Each residential unit will be provided with all Structured Cabling, devices and media panel. Media panel size shall be minimum 42” high (Verizon and Comcast approved). One (1) duplex receptacle will be provided inside the bottom of the media panel. m. Each residential unit receives the following cable drops: TV/data drop (RG6/CAT6A) in each bedroom and living room, voice drop (CAT6) in the kitchen. 11. Security and Access Control a. The security and access control system for the building will consist of selected door access system devices and electronic surveillance cameras (ES). These devices will connect to the building’s security and access control panels. All security equipment, devices, wiring and related infrastructure will be provided to meet the Owner’s needs. This will consist of interior access doors, exterior access doors and IP video surveillance cameras, controller power supplies and proximity key tags adequate to provide security for the building. 12. Entry Intercom System a. An app-based type system similar to Butterfly MX for entrance video intercom system including but not limited to 12” in-wall intercom panel, all required equipment, devices, hardware, software, wiring and conduit for a complete functional system shall be included as a part of Security system design. This system shall be designed/provided by the Security/Access system designer. If Security system design is in RWS design scope, then refer to the low voltage system description of this report for additional information. b. Provide Bid Alternate line-item price for a complete hard-wired video entry intercom system such as AiPhone. 13. Emergency Responder Radio System: a. An Emergency Responder Radio Coverage system will be provided for fire department, police department and EMS in compliance with Massachusetts 780 CMR 916 requirements, NFPA 72 requirements, and local Emergency Responders requirements. Assume (3) BDA panels, one for each fire, police, and EMS. b. The BDA headend equipment shall be located on top floor within 2-hour fire rated closet or room. The vertical run and components shall be within rated shaft or stacked rated closets. 14. Two-Way Elevator Communication System (When design is approved to be in RWS Scope) a. The required two-way communication system in compliance with 780 CMR Section 1009.8 shall be provided. A two-way call station at each elevator landing and base station adjacent to the fire alarm remote annunciator is required. Where access doors to stairs are locked assume call station for every five floors within stairwells main landings. This system shall be designed/provided by the Telecommunications system designer. If Telecommunications design is in RWS design scope, then refer to the low voltage system description of this report for additional information. 15. Raceway, Feeder and Branch Circuit a. Metal Conduit 1) EMT – all dry mechanically ventilated exposed areas where allowed by Code. 2) RMC or RSC – unheated spaces, unmetered feeders, underground sweeps. 3) Non-Metallic 4) PVC Sch 40 – underground. b. Feeders 1) 600V feeders shall be single-conductor aluminum (the Service Entrance, Elevators and fire pumps must be copper feeders.), 600V rated with XHHW or XHHW-2 insulation, feeders shall be color coded using color type at all connections and in all pull and junction boxes. Minimum size aluminum feeders shall be #3 AWG. All conductors smaller than #3 AWG shall be copper (CU). 2) Feeders to loadcenters shall be Type MC cable for Type I and II construction and Type SER cable for Type III, IV or V construction. Where the feeder is leaving floor regardless of building type provide MC cable. 3) All emergency feeders shall be 2-hore fire rated MI cables. c. Branch Circuits 1) Branch circuit conductors shall be #12 AWG minimum, 600V rated with THWN or THHN insulation minimum with continuous color coding. 2) Branch circuits shall be Type MC cable for Type I and II construction and Type NM for Type III, IV or V construction. NM allowed within dwelling units only. 3) All conductors may be aluminum unless copper is required per the equipment nameplate. (ex. Elevators and fire pumps must be copper feeders.). d. Service Entrance 1) The main service entrance conductors shall be XHHW-2 copper, low smoke zero halogen (LSZH) type in concrete duck bank or rigid steel conduit when above ground. 16. Lightning Protection System a. The building will be provided with a UL Master Label lightning protection system. b. Lightning protection systems shall conform to UL 96A and NFPA 780. Additionally, the system shall comply with all Factory Mutual Global requirements. c. Buildingperimeterground ring willbeprovided consistingof10’-0”copper grounds rods and buried #500kcmil copper conductor. 17. Vibration Isolation and Seismic Restraints for Electrical Systems a. Provide a “Vibration isolation And Seismic Restraints For Electrical Systems Report” for vibration isolation analysis, seismic restraint, design plans/details and specifications report for all electrical systems to resist seismic forces as determined in accordance to State of Massachusetts Building Code for the “Seismic Hazard Exposure Group” and the “Seismic Performance Category” as identified in the architectural and structural contract documents for design classifications. 18. Short Circuit & Coordination Study and Arc Flash Hazard Analysis a. Provide a Short Circuit & Coordination Study and Arc Flash Hazard Analysis Study. These studies shall be performed by the distribution equipment manufacturer, or a firm engaged by the distribution equipment manufacturer and the Arc Flash Analysis shall be per NFPA 70E, Article 130.3, Annex D. 19. Solar Photovoltaic (PV) Systems a. Refer to Architectural program information and the Solar PV Consultant for future design build solar photovoltaic (PV) system. Electrical shall allow for provisions for future PV system interface. No Solar design included in RWS scope of services. 20. Electric Vehicle Charging Stations a. As of now there is no garage or parking space for this project, therefore there is no EV charging station. C. PLUMBING 1. Codes and Standards: a. 780 CMR – Massachusetts State Building Code, 10th Edition b. 248 CMR -Massachusetts State Plumbing Code c. Massachusetts Fuel Gas Code d. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) e. All state and local zoning and building laws and regulations. f. All applicable local codes, amendments and ordinances. g. Applicability of Standards: United States of America National Construction Industry standards will be used as a minimum except where more stringent requirements are included in the Design Criteria. Latest edition of each standard will apply. 1) Underwriters Laboratories (UL) 2) American National Standard Institute (ANSI) 3) American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) 4) Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors National Association (SMACNA) 2. General a. All piping, fittings, valves, fixtures, supplies and stops, meters, outlets etc. shall be compliant with the “Reduction of Lead in Drinking Water Act”; NSF 61 section 9. b. All piping runs shall be coordinated and neatly organized with the open ceiling concept. c. All Boston Children’s Hospital Standards shall apply to this project. 3. Water Service a. The building shall be fed from a 6in cement-lined ductile iron water service connected to the site water distribution. The water service room shall be 15ft x18ft. b. The water service room shall be located on the first floor in a room along an exterior wall of the building. The new water service will pass below grade into the water service room. c. The service shall be metered upon entry to the water service room with a duplex (parallel) water meter arrangement to allow for flow testing of the meter. The water meters shall be provided and installed by the plumber. There will be one main meter set that serves the entire building for billing the owner. d. The water service shall have a future connection for building B e. Piping: 1) Water service piping shall be class 56 cement lined ductile iron, water service and shall be by civil with a blind flange terminating in the water service room. 4. Water Distribution a. A hydrant flow test was conducted on 05-06-2025 with the following results: Static pressure of 72 PSI, residual pressure of 54 PSI flowing 2126 gpm. It is assumed that a water booster pump will be required at this time. b. Booster pump 1) Furnish and install a factory packaged and tested, triplex variable-speed domestic water pressure boosting system similar to Prodigy Model QES_321.5-6.54 as manufactured by QuantumFlo of Sanford, FL and distributed by Gustavo Preston Company of Chelmsford, MA 978-250-3333. Booster System shall include pumps, motors, controls, valves, interconnecting piping, wiring and accessories for a complete, NSF 61 and NSF 372 Certified system with UL508A Industrial Control Panel and UL QCZJ 3rd Party Package Label affixed. 2) The system shall be capable of providing a constant system pressure of 119 Psig with flow rates from 0 to 209 GPM when suction pressure is 72 Psig minimum using a 208 Volt, 3 PHASE, 60 hertz power. 3) Each pump shall deliver 104 GPM at 109 ft. TDH using a 5 HP, 3450 RPM motor. c. Domestic water shall run up to the ceiling of the 1st floor, offset and central riser run up to the penthouse to the central hot water plant. 1) The horizontal distribution shall connect to the water risers in each unit to serve the units in the stack below. Each branch run to the riser shall have an isolation valve above the ceiling with an access panel. 2) All domestic cold water risers shall have PRV’s located at the horizontal branch line to each apartment unit on floors 2-5. d. Dwelling units will be piped from the central water distribution and will not be tenant metered for billing. e. Amenity areas, common spaces, central laundry rooms, etc. shall be fed from the down-fed distribution piping as required. f. Backflow prevention will be provided through in-house reduced pressure backflow preventers as follows and not limited to: 1) Irrigation system a) A separate meter for the irrigation system will be provided in the water service room for connection and extension by the irrigation contractor. The water supply will be separately metered and provided with a reduced pressure backflow preventer in the main water room. g. Hot Water: 1) The domestic hot water shall be generated from a central plant located on the roof and in a penthouse mechanical room. The Mitsubishi system shall consist of air to water (glycol) heat pumps on the roof, with pumps, heat exchangers and tanks located in the mechanical penthouse as follows: a) 178.9 MBH of plant generating capacity resulting in (3) QAHV module with N+1 b) Capacity of each QAHV module is 89,684 MBH. c) 940 gallons of storage resulting in (6) 175 gallon storage tanks d) Can use larger tanks if architect gives us the ok for double-wide doors. e) Swing tank/temperature maintenance requirement of 4.9 kW resulting in (1) 150 gallon tank at 18kW f) Winter design conditions used: 6°F DB/ 5°F WB 2) An alternate hot water central plant system shall be by Watts and have the following components. a) 1 – HPL-500A = Aegis Heat Pump b) 1 -Mark II – HX Skid c) 1 – LC250S – 250 Gallon Storage Tank d) 1 – LC250-R144 = 250 Gallon Storage w/144kw e) 1 – 90 L 150A-VE – 150 Gallon Storage w/18kw -Swing Tank f) 1 – V71N-N – Digital Mixing Valve g) 1 – DTL-200 – Exp. Tank h) 1 – GFP-30 – Glycol Feed System i) Electronically controlled mixing valve shall be as manufactured by Powers, Leonard or Armstrong. j) Hot water shall be fed from a central riser down through the building. Pressure zones shall match those of the cold water system zones, except the bottom of the hot water risers shall be piped back through circulation balancing valves to a central circulation riser and pumped back into the central water heater plant to maintain temperature. h. Piping a. All water distribution piping within the residential floors shall be CPVC with solvent cemented connections. All valves shall be bronze, not CPVC. b. All water distribution piping within (running through) or serving the amenity spaces which shall be Type L copper with roll-groove or press connections. 1) Propress up to 2” 2) Roll groove fittings (Victaulic copper system) 2-1/2” and larger 3) All domestic water shall be insulated per the energy code 4) All interior water piping will be insulated. Where piping is located in unconditioned spaces it shall be heat traced and insulated. c. All domestic water piping shall be insulated. 1) All domestic water (hot, cold and circulation) shall be insulated 5. Sanitary a. Building sanitary drains shall leave the building at the below grade at the first floor level and drain to the sanitary system Kilmarnock street. b. Traditional sanitary and vent stack system shall be provided for each stacked bathroom and each stacked kitchen. c. Washing machines shall be piped with an independent stack system piped to the building sanitary exit due code requirements with quantity of floors. d. Sanitary waste shall be a traditional sanitary and vent stack system installed with vertical stacks. The sanitary stack is piped down through the building and connected to the site sanitary system 10ft beyond the foundation wall. Vents through the roof shall be provided at the top of the stacks. e. The top of the sanitary stacks shall tie together above the top floor ceiling and penetrate the roof in locations that are a minimum of 25ft from any building opening or fresh air intake. f. All above ground piping serving the residential units may be solid core schedule 40 PVC pipe and fittings. Piping shall be PVC until the point at which the common areas connect into the system, then the piping will transition to cast iron. g. Piping shall be no hub cast iron above grade with heavy duty husky 4-band clamps (6 Band for sizes 6” and larger) serving the amenity areas waste and vent system with service weight cast iron below grade and shall be American made. h. Sumps and ejectors shall be as manufactured by Weil. 1) Elevator sump pumps shall be 0.75 HP, 50 GPM per elevator car (100 GPM for two cars, 1.5 HP), with local alarm. Elevator sumps shall discharge to an oil separator that drains to the sanitary system. The separator shall have an independent 4in vent to the roof. 2) Ejector and force main piping shall be type L copper or ductile iron. 6. Storm a. Storm drainage will route down through the building by gravity and connect to the storm main at the ceiling of the ground level, below the 1st floor slab. Clear water waste in the basement shall be pumped. b. The roof area shall be drained via roof drains that collect and drain into the storm water retention structure on site. The storm water retention structure is under other divisions of the specifications and shall be installed under said division. The routing of the piping in the building will need to be coordinated, it is likely that multiple storm water connections will be needed in order to maintain clearances on level 1. The piping shall be sized for a 4”/hr rainfall event. c. A secondary (emergency) roof drainage system shall be installed in case of blockage in the primary system. The secondary system shall consist of roof drains piped through the building and discharge through the building façade 18 in above grade. Each shall terminate with a through the wall fitting with critter screen and hinged perforated door. d. All storm piping shall be cast iron (no hub with 4-band clamps, 6-band clamps for 6” and larger). Below slab piping shall be service weight cast iron. e. All storm piping as well as the roof drain bodies shall be insulated with 1” thick molded fiberglass. f. Foundation drainage pumps shall be duplex, 1.5 HP, 50 GPM each. Foundation drainage system shall be designed by Geotech, it shall be installed under the division 22 permit. 7. Natural Gas a. The building will not have a natural gas service. 8. Plumbing Fixtures (Residential Units) a. Water closets, lavatory faucets and shower heads shall be Watersense labeled. b. Water Closets 1) Vitreous china, floor mounted, floor outlet, tank type (0.8 GPF) manually operated. 2) Closed front toilet seat with lid, slow close check hinge. c. Lavatories 1) Integral basin, 0.5 gpm, manually operated faucet with lever handles, lead free with pop-up drain. d. Showers 1) Acrylic base with solid surface or tiled surround and Symmons ASSE 1016 pressure balancing shower valve with 1.5 GPM shower head. Accessible units shall be provided with hand held shower with hose and transfer shower base. Shower curtain and curtain rod. 2) All accessible showers shall have a floor drain within 12” of the shower threshold. e. Tub/shower 1) Cast iron tub with enamel finish and This needs to be confirmed solid surface or tiled surround and Symmons pressure balancing ASSE 1016 valve with 1.5 GPM shower head and tub spout. f. Kitchen Sinks 1) Drop in type 18 gauge 304 stainless steel with single lever control lead free faucet, 1.0 GPM. Dishwasher waste connection to the sink tailpiece, Oatey water supply box with water hammer arrestor. 2) Garbage disposals shall be Insinkerator model # Badger 5 with 1/2 HP. g. Laundry (located on every other floor off of the hallway) 1) The washing machine shall be provided with a wall outlet laundry supply and waste box with water hammer arrestor, no-burst hoses. The laundry rooms shall be provided with floor drains to drain away water from any possible leaks. Each laundry room shall have a hose bibb and a trap primer. h. Refrigerator 1) Water supply box for the refrigerator (ice maker) with water hammer arrestor. 9. Plumbing Fixtures (Common Areas) a. Water Closets 1) Vitreous china, floor mounted, floor outlet, tank type (0.8 GPF) manually operated. 2) Open front toilet seat (for non-private use), slow close check hinge. b. Urinals 1) Vitreous china, wall mounted wall outlet, 0.125 GPF hydro powered sensor operated flush valve. c. Lavatories 1) Vitreous china, wall hung type with 0.5gpm, hydro powered, sensor operated lead free faucet with below deck thermostatic mixing valve set to 105oF. d. Showers 1) No common area showers e. Kitchen sinks 1) Drop in type 18 gauge 304 stainless steel with single lever control lead free faucet, 1.0 GPM. 2) Garbage disposals shall be Insinkerator model # Badger 5 with 1/2 HP. f. Electric water coolers (bi-level) with bottle fillers shall be provided near the fitness room and amenity areas. g. Floor drains and hose bibs shall be provided in all restrooms with two or more flush valve fixtures and in all mechanical rooms. h. Non-freeze type recessed wall hydrants with vacuum breakers and flush access doors shall be provided every 100 ft along the building exterior. 10. Drainage Specialties a. General floor drains shall be cast iron body and nickel bronze strainer, heel proof grate. Jay R. Smith, Zurn or Josam. b. Mechanical room floor drains shall be cast iron body and nickel bronze strainer, loose set tractor grate and sediment bucket. Jay R. Smith, Zurn or Josam. c. Roof drains shall be cast iron body with nickel bronze dome strainer. Overflow shall be the same, with standpipe set to a height determined by structural for the allowable roof ponding. d. Roof patios/terraces shall be cast iron body with nickel-bronze strainer, bi-level drainage for drainage matt with pervious pavers. e. Floor drains shall be located in all mechanical rooms near water based system equipment, at backflow preventers, water meters, trash rooms, etc. f. All common area bathrooms shall have a floor drain and hose bib. g. Cleanouts Page 29 1) Floor cleanouts shall consist of dura-coated cast iron body, no hub or speed set outlet, tapered threaded plug, adjustable nickel bronze top, J.R. Smith, Zurn, Josam or Watts. 2) Tile or carpet recess as required for floor finish. 11. Insulation: a. Insulation shall be as follows: 1) Hot water and hot water circulation piping (105oF – 140oF): 2) Pipe size less than 1 .”: insulation shall be 1-1/2" thick (R10) 3) Pipe size 1 .” and greater: insulation shall be 2” thick (R 12) 4) All 140oF hot water and hot water circulation piping shall be insulated with 2” thick insulation (R 12) 5) Cold water piping: insulation shall be 1” thick and have a thermal conductivity (R3.7) °F. .ft2  .inch/hr per exceeding0.27Btu not 6) Storm water conductors and clear water waste piping: insulation shall be 1” 7) Piping and fittings exposed to the elements or not concealed shall have PVC jacket applied over the factory applied 8 ounce canvas finish or pre-sized glass cloth jacket. 8) All insulation and jacketing/fittings located in air plenums shall be smoke-proof and non-combustible, in compliance with the flame and smoke spread ratings of ASTM E84 (plenum rated). 12. Identification a. The piping of each system shall be identified in the following locations and where directed by the Architect. b. Pipe mains and branches – every 10’-0” c. At each valve. d. Each wall penetration (both sides) e. Each riser including branch risers from mains. ft2  .inch/hrperBtu0.27exceedingnotconductivity thermalahaveandthick (R3.7).°F. .f. At each piece of equipment. g. At each change of direction h. Near each access panel i. All equipment used in the plumbing systems shall have a permanently attached nameplate identifying the manufacturer, service, size, serial number or model number, etc. The nameplates shall be kept clean and readable at all times. j. Each item of equipment such as pumps, water heaters, grease traps, interceptors, etc., shall be identified by a permanently attached nameplate. 1) A legend showing the service and an arrow indicating the direction of flow shall be applied on each pipe installed by the Plumbing Subcontractor. 2) Provide neat circular brass valve tags of at least 1 .” in diameter, attached with brass hook to each valve stem or handle as determined by Architect. Stamp on these valve tags, in letters as large as practical, the number of the valve and the service, such as “HW”, “HWC”, “CW”, for hot water, hot water circulation, cold water. The numbers of each service shall be consecutive. Obtain approval of Architect prior to installation. D. FIRE PROTECTION 1. General a. The new standpipe and sprinkler systems shall meet the requirements of all applicable F.M. Global Standards as a minimum. b. All Boston Children’s Hospital Standards shall apply to this project. c. All piping runs shall be coordinated and neatly organized with the open ceiling concept. 2. Seismic bracing shall not be required, per the requirements of ASCE 07 and the seismic design category being B. 3. Codes and Standards: a. 780 CMR – Massachusetts State Building Code, 10th Edition b. FM Global (Factory Mutual) 1) FM 2-0 Installation of Sprinkler Systems 2) FM 3-10 Installation/Maintenance of Fire Service Mains 3) FM 3-11 Pressure Reducing Valves for Fire Protection Service 4) FM 3-26 FP Water Demand for Non-Storage Sprinklered Properties 5) FM 4-4N Standpipe and Hose Systems c. All state and local zoning and building laws and regulations. d. All applicable local codes, amendments, and ordinances. e. Applicability of Standards: United States of America National Construction Industry standards will be used as a minimum except where more stringent requirements are included in the Design Criteria. Latest edition of each standard shall apply. 1) Underwriters Laboratories (UL) 2) American National Standard Institute (ANSI) 3) American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) 4) Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors National Association (SMACNA) 4. Water Supply a. A hydrant flow test was conducted on 05-06-2025 with the following results: Static pressure of 72 PSI, residual pressure of 54 PSI flowing 2126 gpm. b. Hydrant flow test information is not current and a new hydrant flow test will need to be conducted. It is assumed the building will not require a fire pump. This sizing is only an estimate and will need to be refined once new hydrant flow test information becomes available. c. Water supply for the fire sprinkler and standpipe systems will come from a connection to the site water distribution system. The fire service will enter the building into the domestic water service room located on the ground level. d. The new 8” fire service will pass through the ground floor into the water service room and will be piped through an 6-inch double check valve type backflow preventer. The new water supply main will be equipped with a supervised control valve on the supply side of the backflow prevention device. e. The new water supply main will be equipped with a low water supply pressure switch to signal a loss in City pressure. Pressure gauges in 3-way valves will be installed on the supply and discharge side of the backflow device. The backflow preventer will also be equipped with a test connection that will allow full flow testing of the device as required by NFPA Standards. f. A 6” future connection for the fire protection system in building B will be installed. 5. Standpipe System a. Each of the egress stairs will be equipped with a standpipe and test/drain riser. The standpipe will supply a 2 1/2" hose valve for Fire Department use. b. All combined standpipe systems in heated areas will be Class I automatic wet pipe systems. c. Piping interconnecting the standpipes will also be provided with Fire Department connections located on the building façade within 100 feet of a site fire hydrant. d. Each combined standpipe will be equipped with a floor control valve station consisting of a supervised control valve, check valve, water flow switch, drain, and test connection, drain and test riser and a 2 .” hose valve with a 2 .” x 1 .” reducer coupling with cap and chain. Drain and test risers above grade will discharge to grade. e. Provide3”drain risersforeach standpipe,eachdrain shalldischargeto theexterior of the building. f. Stairs that do not go to the roof will be provided with roof hydrants controlled via a non-rising stem OS&Y valve, remote control on the roof adjacent the hydrant. 6. Wet Pipe Fire Sprinkler Systems a. Wet pipe fire sprinkler systems on each floor of the building will be connected to the standpipe system with control valves at each connection and will be supervised by the building fire alarm system. Each connection will be provided with a vane type waterflow switch connected to the building fire alarm system. 1) Each floor sprinkler zone shall be fed from two standpipes, each connection with a floor control valve station. b. Wet pipe fire sprinkler systems in all areas other than residential dwelling units will be equipped with quick response type fire sprinklers spaced and located as required for the hazard classification encountered. c. Wet pipe fire sprinkler systems in residential dwelling units will be equipped with concealed style quick response and/or residential type fire sprinklers spaced and located as required for the unit room and ceiling configuration. d. Concealed combustible space sprinklers will be provided for the ceiling cavities of combustible construction. e. Top floor sprinkler system will be a wet system, to prevent freezing the building cavity/construction/envelope must remain tight and insulation must be at the roof surface, not at the unit ceiling. 7. Dry Pipe Fire Sprinkler Systems a. Dry pipe fire sprinkler systems will be installed in all areas that could be exposed to freezing temperatures such as the trash chutes, trash rooms, loading dock areas, etc. b. Dry pipe fire sprinkler systems will be equipped with General Air Vapor Shield corrosion inhibiting systems on the dry system air compressor. c. Dry pipe fire sprinkler systems in areas without ceilings will be equipped with upright quick response type fire sprinklers on exposed piping spaced and located as required for the hazard encountered. d. Dry pipe fire sprinkler systems in areas with suspended ceilings will be equipped with concealed style quick response type dry pendent fire sprinklers with piping concealed above ceilings. Sprinklers will be spaced and located as required for the hazard encountered. 8. Piping a. Piping for all wet standpipe and wet fire sprinkler systems shall be as follows: 1) 1”: Schedule 40 piping with threaded fittings 2) 1-1/4” to 2”: Schedule 40 piping with roll groove fittings 3) 2-1/2” and larger: Schedule 10 piping with roll groove fittings a) Schedule 10 piping shall not be threaded or welded 4) Piping serving the residential floors, outside the stairwells shall be Tyco Blazemaster CPVC. b. All dry sprinkler system piping shall be schedule 40 steel pipe with corrosion inhibiting system. O:\2025\250096-00\4_Files\Reports\250096-00_Kilmarnock Bldg A_MEPFP SD Narrative_2025-05-14r0.docx 02 FLOORS 2-8 
Local ERVs with sidewall venting for dwelling units and common spaces
COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 1 COMPONENT 2 COMPONENT 1 TRANSFORMERS BELOW  2BR  T  T  1BR  1BR  2BR (3) ASHP ST 1BR  TRASH  1BR  ELEC  1BR ST EMR/STOR  1BR 1BR  ST 1BR  TRASH  1BR  ELEC Mechanical penthouse 16'x20' minimum interior dimensions ROOF BELOW VRFVRFVRF 1BR   2BR  2BR  1BR  2BR  1BR  1BR  Proposed Generator location with factory sound attenuation enclosure- A Larger Custom enclosure might be required to satisfy Boston’s noise-control ordinance at the property line and reduce sound levels to the city’s allowable limits.stair/platform might be required on both side as shown in orange 2-6 FL  7-8 FL  0' 10' 20' 40' SCALE: 1" =20' 12/13/2024 Architecture, Interiors, + Planning 