University of Connecticut GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MECHANICAL TRADES 23 0400 -1 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 SECTION 23 0400 GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MECHANICAL TRADES GENERAL 1.01RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 1 Specification Sections, apply to all Divisions 23 Sections. B. This section applies to certain sections of Division 26, "Electrical," and this section applies to all sections of Division 23, "Mechanical" of this project specification unless specified otherwise in the individual sections. C. The Drawings of other trades (Architectural, Food Service, Structural, Landscape, Civil, Mechanical, Fire Protection and Plumbing) shall be examined for coordination and familiarity of work with other Contractors. Any duplication or omission of provisions in this project should be brought to the attention of the Owners prior to Bidding. 1.02 DESCRIPTION A. The General Conditions and Supplementary General Conditions are a part of this Division and are to be considered a part of this Contract. B. Where items of the General Conditions and Supplementary General Conditions are repeated in other Sections of the Specifications, it is merely intended to qualify or to call particular attention to them. It is not intended that any other parts of the General Conditions and Supplementary General Conditions shall be assumed to be omitted if not repeated therein. This Section applies equally and specifically to all Contractors supplying labor and/or equipment and/or materials as required under each Section of this Division. Where conflicts exist between the drawings and the specifications or between this section of the specifications and other sections, the more stringent or higher cost option shall apply. 1.03 INTENT A. It is the intent of the Specifications and Drawings to call for finished work, tested and ready for operation. Provide all parts necessary for the intended use, fully complete and operational, and installed in professional manner in accordance with the design intent. B. Any apparatus, appliance, material or work not shown on drawings but mentioned in the specifications, or vice versa, or any incidental accessories necessary to make the work complete and ready for operation as determined by good trade practice even if not particularly specified, shall be furnished, delivered and installed under their respective Divisions without any additional expense to the Owner. C. Minor details not usually shown or specified but necessary for proper installation and operation shall be included in the work as though they were hereinafter shown or specified. D. Work under each Section shall include giving written notice to the Owner and Engineer of any materials or apparatus believed inadequate or unsuitable; in violation of laws, ordinances, rules or regulations of authorities having jurisdiction; and any necessary items of work omitted. In the absence of such written notice, it is mutually agreed that work under each Section includes the cost of all required items for the accepted, satisfactory functioning of the entire system without extra compensation. University of Connecticut GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MECHANICAL TRADES 23 0400 -2 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1.04 DEFINITIONS A. No Exceptions Taken – reviewed and determined to be in general conformance with contract documents. B. “Approved equal” mean any product which in the opinion of the Engineer is equal in quality, arrangement, appearance, and performance to the product specified. C. Directed: Terms such as "directed," "requested," "authorized," "selected," "approved," "required," and "permitted" mean "directed by the Engineer," "requested by the Engineer," and similar phrases. D. “Finished” refers to all rooms and areas to be specified to receive architectural treatment as indicated on the drawings. All rooms and areas not covered, including underground tunnels and areas above ceilings shall be considered not finished, unless otherwise noted. E. “Furnish” or “supply” shall mean purchase, deliver to, and off-load at the job site, ready to be installed including where appropriate all necessary interim storage and protection. F. Indicated: The term "indicated" refers to graphic representations, notes, or schedules on the Drawings, other paragraphs or schedules in the Specifications, and similar requirements in the Contract Documents. Where terms such as "shown," "noted," "scheduled," and "specified" are used, it is to help the reader locate the reference; no limitation on location is intended. G. “Install” shall mean set in place complete with all mounting facilities and connections as necessary ready for normal use or service. H. “Product” shall mean any item of equipment, material, fixture, apparatus, appliance or accessory installed under this Division. I. “Provide” shall mean furnish (or supply) and install as necessary. J. Regulation: The term "Regulations" includes laws, ordinances, statutes, and lawful orders issued by authorities having jurisdiction, as well as rules, conventions, and agreements within the construction industry that control performance of the Work. K. Remove: The term “remove” means “to disconnect from its present position, remove from the premises and to dispose of in a legal manner.” L. Special Warranties: The term “Special Warranties” are written warranties required by or incorporated in the Contract Documents, either to extend time limits provided by standard warranties or to provide greater rights for the Owner. M. Standard Product Warranties: The term “Standard Product Warranties” are preprinted written warranties published by individual manufacturers for particular products and are specifically endorsed by the manufacturer to the Owner. N. “Subcontractor” means specifically the subcontractor working under this Division. Other Contractors are specifically designated “Plumbing Subcontractor”, “General Contractor” and so on. Note: Take care to ascertain limits of responsibility for connecting equipment which requires connections by two or more trades. O. Substitutions: Requests for changes in products, materials, equipment, and methods of construction proposed by the Contractor are considered requests for "substitutions." University of Connecticut GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MECHANICAL TRADES 23 0400 -3 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 P. “Wiring” shall mean cable assembly, raceway, conductors, fittings and any other necessary accessories to make a complete wiring system. 1.05 CONTRACT DOCUMENTS A. The two dimensional drawings govern the construction. They show the design intent and are part of the Contract Documents. BIM models are not part of contract documents. They are developed for convenience only. B. Drawings are diagrammatic and indicate the general arrangement of systems and work included in the Contract. Consult the Architectural Drawings and Details for exact location of fixtures and equipment; where same are not definitely located, obtain this information from the Architect. (Do not scale the drawings) C. Work under each Section shall closely follow Drawings in layout of work; check Drawings of other Divisions to verify spaces in which work will be installed. Maintain maximum headroom; where space conditions appear inadequate, Owner and Engineer shall be notified before proceeding with installations. D. The Owner may, without extra charge, make reasonable modifications in the layout as needed to prevent conflict with work of other trades and/or for proper execution of the work. 1.06 DISCREPANCIES IN DOCUMENTS A. Where variances occur between the Drawings and Specifications or within either of the Documents, the item or arrangement of better quality, shall be included in the Contract price. The Owner and Engineer shall decide on the item and the manner in which the work shall be installed. B. Where Drawings or Specifications conflict or are unclear, submit clarification request in writing before Award of Contract. Otherwise, Architect's interpretation of Contract Documents shall be final, and no additional compensation shall be permitted due to discrepancies or un-clarities thus resolved. C. Where Drawings or Specifications do not coincide with manufacturers' recommendations or with applicable codes and standards, submit clarification request in form of an RFI before installation. Otherwise, make changes in installed work required for compliance with manufacturer instructions or codes and standards within Contract Price. D. Where insufficient information exists in the documents to precisely describe a certain component or subsystem, or the routing of a component or its coordination with other building elements, where notification required by Paragraph (B) above has not been submitted, provide the specific component or subsystem with all parts necessary for the intended use, fully complete and operational, and installed in professional manner either concealed or exposed in accordance with the design intent. E. Where discrepancies exist between the mechanical, plumbing, fire protection, and electrical drawings in regards to what trade owns disconnects or starters, the discrepancy shall be brought to the Architect’s attention in accordance with paragraph (B) above. If the scope is not resolved prior to the Award of Contract, Division 26 shall provide such items. 1.07 CODES AND STANDARDS A. Reference Standard Compliance University of Connecticut GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MECHANICAL TRADES 23 0400 -4 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1. Where equipment or materials are specified to conform to industry and technical society reference standards of the organizations such as American National Standards Institute (ANSI), American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA), and Underwriters Laboratories Inc. (UL), submit proof of such compliance. The label or listing by the specified organization will be acceptable evidence of compliance. 2. Independent Testing Organization Certificate: In lieu of the label or listing indicated above, submit a certificate from an independent testing organization, competent to perform testing, and approved by the Engineer. The certificate shall state that the item has been tested in accordance with the specified organization's test methods and that the item complies with the specified organization's reference standard. B. Wherever Codes and/or Standards are mentioned in these Specifications, the latest applicable edition or revision of the local building or life safety code shall be followed. C. Comply with the latest version of the UCONN University Planning, Design and Construction (UPDC) Design Guidelines and Performance Standards, all volumes and appendices. D. The following Standards shall be used where referenced by the following abbreviations: AABC Associated Air Balance Council ACGIH American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists ADC Air Diffusion Council AGA American Gas Association AIA American Institute of Architects AMCA Air Moving and Conditioning Association ANSI American National Standards Institute API American Petroleum Institute ARI Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Institute ASHRAE American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Engineers ASME American Society of Mechanical Engineers ASPE American Society of Plumbing Engineers ASSE American Society of Sanitary Engineers ASTM American Society of Testing and Materials University of Connecticut GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MECHANICAL TRADES 23 0400 -5 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 AWS AWWA CGA CSA CISPI EJMA EPA FM FSSC HIS IEEE IRI ISO MCAA NBS NEBB NEMA NFPA NOFI NSC NSF OSHA PDI SBI SMACNA American Welding Society American Water Works Association Compressed Gas Association Canadian Standards Association Cast Iron Soil Pipe Institute Expansion Joint Manufacturing Association Environmental Protection Agency Factory Mutual Federal Specification Hydraulic Institute Standards Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Industrial Risk Insurers Insurance Services Office Mechanical Contractors Association of America National Bureau of Standards National Environmental Balancing Bureau National Electrical Manufacturers Association National Fire Protection Association National Oil Fuel Institute National Safety Council National Sanitation Foundation Occupational Safety and Health Administration Plumbing and Drainage Institute Steel Boiler Industry (Division of Hydronics Institute) Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors National Association University of Connecticut GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MECHANICAL TRADES 23 0400 -6 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 STI Steel Tank Institute UL Underwriters’ Laboratories E. All materials furnished and all work installed shall comply with the rules and recommendations of the NFPA, the requirements of the local utility companies, the recommendations of the fire insurance rating organization having jurisdiction and the requirements of all Governmental departments having jurisdiction. F. The Contractor shall include in the work, without extra cost to the Owner, any labor, materials, services, apparatus and Drawings in order to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, whether shown on Drawings and/or specified or not. 1.08 PERMITS AND FEES A. The Contractor shall give all necessary notices, obtain all permits; and pay all Government and State sales taxes and fees where applicable, and other costs, including utility connections or extensions in connection with the work, file all necessary Drawings, prepare all documents and obtain all necessary approvals of all Governmental and State departments having jurisdiction, obtain all required certificates of inspection for his work, and deliver a copy to the Owner and Engineer before request for acceptance and final payment for the work. 1.09 EQUIPMENT EQUIVALENTS AND SUBSTITUTIONS A. Certain manufacturers of material, apparatus or appliances are indicated in the drawings and specifications for this project. These items have been used as the basis of design, and as a convenience in fixing the minimum standard of quality, finish and design that is required. If the Contractors uses an “approved equal” alternative to the basis of design, and if the features of that alternative have an impact on other components of the Project, the Contractor shall include the necessary adjustments in those components, whether for architectural, structural, mechanical, electrical, fire protection, or any other elements, plus any adjustments for difference in performance. B. Where no specific make of material, apparatus or appliance is mentioned, any first-class product made by a reputable manufacturer may be submitted for Architect and Engineer review. C. Where the Contractor proposes to use an item that is different from the basis of design in the Drawings and specifications, and that will require the redesign of the structure, partitions, foundations, piping, wiring or any other component of the mechanical, electrical, or architectural layout, the Contractor shall provide the necessary redesign of those components. D. Where the Contractor proposes to deviate (provide an equivalent or request for substitution) from the basis of design scheduled equipment or materials as hereinafter specified or shown on the drawings, they are required to submit a requested for substitution in writing. The Contractor shall state in their request whether it is a substitution, equivalent or a non approved equivalent to that specified and the amount of credit or extra cost involved. A copy of said request shall be included in the Base Bid with manufacturer’s equipment cuts. The Base Bid shall be based on using the materials and equipment as specified with no exceptions. University of Connecticut GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MECHANICAL TRADES 23 0400 -7 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 E. If an alternative or substitute item results in a difference in quantity and arrangement of structure, piping, ductwork, valves, pumps, insulation, wiring, conduit, and equipment from that specified or indicated on the Drawings, the Contractor shall furnish and install any such additional equipment required by the system, at no additional cost to the Owner including any costs added to other trades due to the equivalent change from the basis of design detailed in the drawings or included within the specifications. F. Equipment, material or devices submitted for review as a “substitution” shall meet the following requirements: G. Substitution Request Submittal: Requests for substitution will be considered if received in writing 14 days before the bid date. Requests received later than 14 days before the bid date may be considered or rejected at the discretion of the Engineer/Owner. Once the Contractor submits a complete request for substitution as determined by the engineer, the engineer reserves the right to request the time necessary to evaluate the request for substitution and review it with the Owner. H. Identify the product, or the fabrication or installation method to be replaced in each request. Include related Specification Section and Drawing numbers. Provide complete documentation showing compliance with the requirements for substitutions, and the following information, as appropriate: 1. Product Data, including Drawings and descriptions of products, fabrication and installation procedures. 2. Samples, where applicable or requested. 3. A detailed comparison of significant qualities of the proposed substitution with those of the Work specified. Significant qualities may include elements such as size, weight, durability, performance and visual effect. 4. Coordination information, including a list of changes or modifications needed to other parts of the Work and to construction performed by the Owner and separate Contractors that will become necessary to accommodate the proposed substitution. 5. A statement indicating the substitution's effect on the Contractor's Construction Schedule compared to the schedule without approval of the substitution. Indicate the effect of the proposed substitution on overall Contract Time. 6. Cost information, including a proposal of the net change, if any in the Contract Sum. 7. Certification by the Contractor that the substitution proposed is equal-to or better in every significant respect to that required by the Contract Documents, and that it will perform adequately in the application indicated. Include the Contractor's waiver of rights to additional payment or time that may subsequently become necessary because of the failure of the substitution to perform adequately. 8. Engineer's Action: Within one week of receipt of the request for substitution, the Engineer will notify the Contractor of acceptance or rejection of the proposed substitution. If a decision on use of a proposed substitute cannot be made or obtained within the time allocated, use the product specified by name. Acceptance of a product substitution will be in the form of an Addendum. 9. Other Conditions: The Contractor's substitution request will be received and considered by the Engineer when one or more of the following conditions are University of Connecticut GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MECHANICAL TRADES 23 0400 -8 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 satisfied, as determined by the Engineer; otherwise requests will be returned without action except to record noncompliance with these requirements. a. The request is directly related to an "or equal" clause or similar language in the Contract Documents. b. The specified product or method of construction cannot be provided within the Contract Time. The request will not be considered if the product or method cannot be provided as a result of failure to pursue the Work promptly or coordinate activities properly. c. A substantial advantage is offered the Owner, in terms of cost, time, energy conservation or other considerations of merit, after deducting offsetting responsibilities the Owner may be required to bear. Additional responsibilities for the Owner may include additional compensation to the Engineer for redesign and evaluation services, increased cost of other construction by the Owner or separate Contractors, and similar considerations. 1.10 SUBMITTAL PROCEDURES A. Provide Submittals in accordance with the requirements of Division 1 and as indicated in the following. B. Coordination: Coordinate preparation and processing of submittals with performance of construction activities. Transmit each submittal sufficiently in advance of performance of related construction activities to avoid delay. 1. Coordinate each submittal with fabrication, purchasing, testing, delivery, other submittals and related activities that require sequential activity. 2. Coordinate transmittal of different types of submittals for related elements of the Work so processing will not be delayed by the need to review submittals concurrently for coordination. The Engineer reserves the right to withhold action on a submittal requiring coordination with other submittals until related submittals are received. C. Processing: Allow sufficient review time so that installation will not be delayed as a result of the time required to process submittals, including time for resubmittals. 1. Allow ten business days for initial review. Allow additional time if processing must be delayed to permit coordination with subsequent submittals. The Engineer will promptly advise the Contractor when a submittal being processed must be delayed for coordination. 2. If an intermediate submittal is necessary, process the same as the initial submittal. 3. Allow ten business days for reprocessing each submittal. 4. No extension of Contract Time will be authorized because of failure to transmit submittals to the Engineer sufficiently in advance of the Work to permit processing. D. Submittal Preparation: Place a permanent label or title block on each submittal for identification. Indicate the name of the entity that prepared each submittal on the label or title block. Submittals shall be arranged in order of specification sections. 1. Include the following information on the label for processing and recording action taken. a. Project name. b. Date. University of Connecticut GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MECHANICAL TRADES 23 0400 -9 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 c. Name and address of Engineer. d. Name and address of Contractor. e. Name and address of subcontractor. f. Name and address of supplier. g. Name of manufacturer. h. Number, title and paragraph of appropriate Specification Section. i. Drawing number and detail references, as appropriate. E. Submittal Transmittal: Package each submittal appropriately for transmittal and handling. Transmit each submittal from Contractor to Engineer using a transmittal form. Submittals received from sources other than the Contractor will be returned without action. On the transmittal, record relevant information and requests for data. On the form, or separate sheet, record deviations from Contract Document requirements, including minor variations and limitations. Include Contractor's certification that information complies with Contract Document requirements. F. Except for submittals for record, information or similar purposes, the Engineer will review each submittal, mark to indicate action taken, and return promptly. Compliance with specified characteristics is the Contractor's responsibility. G. Action Stamp: The Engineer will stamp each submittal with a uniform, self-explanatory action stamp. The stamp will be appropriately marked, to indicate the action taken. 1.11 SHOP DRAWINGS A. Submit neatly prepared information, drawn to accurate scale. Highlight, encircle, or otherwise indicate deviations from the Contract Documents. Do not reproduce Contract Documents or copy standard information as the basis of Shop Drawings. Standard information prepared without specific reference to the Project is not considered Shop Drawings. B. The Contractor shall submit for review detailed shop drawings of all equipment and material specified in each section and coordinated ductwork layouts. No material or equipment may be delivered to the job site or installed until the Contractor has received shop drawings for the particular material or equipment which have been properly reviewed. Shop drawings shall be submitted within 60 days after award of Contract before any material or equipment is purchased. The Contractor shall submit for review all shop drawings to be incorporated in the Mechanical Contract. C. Provide shop drawings for all devices specified under equipment specifications for all systems. Shop drawings shall include manufacturers’ names, catalog numbers, cuts, diagrams, dimensions, identification of products and materials included, compliance with specified standards, notation of coordination requirements, notation of dimensions established by field measurement and other such descriptive data as may be required to identify and accept the equipment. A complete list in each category (example: all fixtures), of all shop drawings, catalog cuts, material lists, etc., shall be submitted to the Engineer at one time. No consideration will be given to a partial shop drawing submittal. D. When a submittal could involve more than one trade, e.g., valves, piping, etc., the submitted shall be separated by traded involved, ie. HVAC, plumbing, fire protection, etc. University of Connecticut GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MECHANICAL TRADES 23 0400 -10 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 E. Where multiple quantities or types of equipment are being submitted, provide a cover sheet (with a list of contents) on the submittal identifying the equipment or material being submitted. F. The Contractor shall furnish all necessary templates, patterns, etc., for installation work and for the purpose of making adjoining work conform; furnish setting plans and shop details to other trades as required. G. “No Exception Taken” rendered on shop drawings shall not be considered as a guarantee of measurements or building conditions. Where drawings are reviewed, review does not mean that drawings have been checked in detail; said approval does not in any way relieve the Contractor from his responsibility or necessity of furnishing material or performing work as required by the Contract Drawings and Specifications. Verify available space prior to submitting shop drawings. Review of shop drawings shall not apply to quantity of material. H. After shop drawings have been reviewed, with no exceptions taken, no further changes will be allowed without the written consent of the Engineer. A. Shop drawing submittal sheets which may show items that are not being furnished shall have those items crossed off to clearly indicate which items will be furnished. B. Bidders shall not rely on any verbal clarification of the Drawings and/or Specifications. Any questions shall be referred to the Engineer in writing at least five (5) working days prior to Bidding to allow for issuance of an Addendum. C. Do not use Shop Drawings without an appropriate final stamp indicating action taken in connection with construction. D. All submittals shall be made in electronic PDF format with searchable OCR (Optical Character Recognition) format. This excludes scanned and faxed materials. 1.12 COORDINATION DRAWINGS AND BIM MODEL E. Coordination drawings are required for all mechanical and electrical trades. The content and procedures described in Division 01 shall be followed, with the additional requirements specifically for the mechanical and electrical trades as described in this Section. If a BIM model is not used on this project, the below requirements shall be accomplished in CAD. F. Prepare coordination drawings accordance with Division 1, at 1 to 1 (full) scale prepared at .” = 1’ -0” detailing major elements, components, and University of Connecticut GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MECHANICAL TRADES 23 0400 -11 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 systems of mechanical equipment and materials in relationship with other systems, installations, and building components. Indicate locations where space is limited for installation and access and where sequencing and coordination of installations are of importance to the efficient flow of the Work, including (but not necessarily limited to) the following: 1. The Contractor shall indicate the proposed locations of piping, conduit, ductwork, equipment, and materials. Include the following: a. Clearances for servicing and maintaining equipment, including tube removal, filter removal, and space for equipment disassembly required for periodic maintenance. b. Equipment connections and support details. c. Exterior wall and foundation penetrations. d. Fire-rated wall and floor penetrations. e. Sizes and locations of required concrete pads and bases. B. Indicate scheduling, sequencing, movement, and positioning of large equipment into the building during construction. C. Prepare floor plans, elevations, and details to indicate penetrations in floors, walls, and ceilings and their relationship to other penetrations and installations. D. Prepare reflected ceiling plans to coordinate and integrate installations, air outlets and inlets, light fixtures, communication systems components, sprinklers, and other ceiling-mounted items. E. The Contractor and each subcontractor shall sign and date each coordination drawing prior to submission. F. Work shall not be performed until coordination drawings have been approved by the architect and engineer. G. Electronic copies of the MEP floor plans and/or BIM model are available to use as a basis for preparing coordination drawings and can be provided by the Engineer. If the Contractor elects to obtain the Engineers electronic files an Electronic Drawing File Release Form must be submitted. This form must be signed by the Contractor, Owner, and Architect. Upon receipt of a signed copy of the Electronic Drawing File Release Form, the Engineer will provide copies of the electronic files for the Contractor’s use. A copy of the Electronic Drawing File Release Form is appended to the end of this specification section H. Review by Engineer of coordination drawings is limited to confirming that requirements for coordination and preparation of plans have been complied with by the Contractor and shall not diminish responsibility under this Contract for final coordination of installation and maintenance clearances of all systems and equipment with Architectural, Structural, Mechanical, Electrical and other related work. 1.13 COORDINATION WITH OTHER DIVISIONS A. All work shall be carried out in conjunction with other trades and full cooperation shall be given in order that all work may proceed with a minimum of delay and interference. Particular emphasis is placed on timely installation of major apparatus and furnishing other Contractors, especially the Contractor or Construction Manager, with information University of Connecticut GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MECHANICAL TRADES 23 0400 -12 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 as to openings, chases, sleeves, bases, inserts, equipment locations, panels, etc., required by other trades. B. The Contractors are required to examine all of the Project Drawings and mutually arrange work so as to avoid interference with the work of other trades. In general, ductwork, HVAC piping, sprinkler piping and drainage lines take precedence over water, gas and electrical conduits. The Engineer shall make final decisions regarding the arrangement of work which cannot be agreed upon by the Contractors. C. Where the work of the Contractor will be installed in close proximity to or will interfere with work of other trades, the Contractors will cooperate in working out space conditions to make a satisfactory adjustment. D. If the work under a Section is installed before coordinating with other Divisions or Sections or so as to cause interference with work of other Sections, the necessary changes to correct the condition shall be made by the Contractor causing the interference without extra charge to the Owner. E. The two dimensional drawings are diagrammatic. They indicate general arrangements of mechanical systems and other work, and are intended to convey sufficient information for skilled contractors and tradespeople to furnish and install complete systems. They are not intended to be absolutely precise; they are not intended to specify or to show every offset, fitting, and component. The purpose of the drawings is to indicate a systems concept, the main components of the systems, and the approximate geometrical relationships. Based on the systems concept, the main components, and the approximate geometrical relationships, provide all other components and materials to make the systems fully complete, coordinated with other systems and the structure and space available, and operational. Similarly, the drawings do not show all offsets required for coordination nor do they show the exact routings and locations needed to coordinate with structure and other trades in order to avoid interferences and to meet ceiling heights and other Architectural requirements. Establish and provide offsets, changes in direction, and exact routings to coordinate all systems. Where conflicts or potential conflicts exist and engineering guidance is desired, submit a “Request for Information” (RFI). F. Controls contractor shall coordinate and sequences of operation with all other trades as necessary to provide a complete and functioning system. 1.14 QUALITY CONTROL A. Service Support: The equipment items shall be supported by service organizations which are reasonably convenient to the equipment installation in order to render satisfactory service to the equipment on a regular and emergency basis during the warranty period of the contract. B. Modification of References: In each of the publications referred to herein, consider the advisory provisions to be mandatory, as though the word, "shall" had been substituted for "should" wherever it appears. C. The Contractor shall furnish the services of an experienced superintendent who shall be constantly in charge of the installation of the work together with all skilled tradespeople, fitters, metal workers, welders, helpers and laborers required to unload, transfer, erect, connect, adjust, start, operate and test each system. University of Connecticut GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MECHANICAL TRADES 23 0400 -13 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 D. Unless otherwise specifically indicated on the Drawings or Specifications, all equipment and materials shall be installed with the acceptance of the Engineer and in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer. This includes the performance of such tests as the manufacturer recommends. E. All labor for installation of mechanical systems shall be performed by experienced, skilled tradespeople under the supervision of a licensed journeyman foreman. All work shall be of a quality consistent with good trade practice and shall be installed in a neat, professional manner. The Engineer reserves the right to reject any work which, in their opinion, has been installed in a substandard, dangerous or unserviceable manner. The Contractor shall replace said work in a satisfactory manner at no extra cost to the Owner. 1.15 SHUTDOWNS A. When installation of a new system requires the temporary shutdown of an existing operating system, the connection of the new system shall be performed at such time as designated by the Owner. B. The Engineer and the Owner shall be notified in writing of the estimated duration of the shutdown period at least ten (10) days in advance of the date the work is to be performed. C. Work shall be arranged for continuous performance whenever possible. The Contractor shall provide all necessary labor, including overtime if required, to assure that existing operating services will be shut down only during the time actually required to make necessary connections. 1.16 TEMPORARY UTILITIES A. General: Provide new materials and equipment; if acceptable to the Engineer, undamaged previously used materials in serviceable condition may be used. Provide materials suitable for the use intended. B. Conditions of Use: Keep temporary services and facilities clean and neat in appearance. Operate in a safe and efficient manner. Take necessary fire prevention measures. Do not overload facilities, or permit them to interfere with progress. Do not allow hazardous dangerous or unsanitary conditions, or public nuisances to develop or persist on the site. C. First Aid Supplies: Comply with governing regulations. D. Fire Extinguishers: Provide hand-carried, portable UL-rated, class "A" fire extinguishers for temporary offices and similar spaces. In other locations provide hand-carried, portable, UL-rated, class "ABC" dry chemical extinguishers, or a combination of extinguishers of NFPA recommended classes for the exposures. E. Utilities: Engage the appropriate local utility company to install temporary service or connect to existing service. Where the company provides only part of the service, provide the remainder with matching, compatible materials and equipment; comply with the company's recommendations. 1. Use Charges: Cost or use charges for temporary facilities are not chargeable to the Owner or Engineer, and will not be accepted as a basis of claims for a Change Order. University of Connecticut GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MECHANICAL TRADES 23 0400 -14 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 F. Water Service: Install water service and distribution piping of sizes and pressures adequate for construction until permanent water service is in use. G. Temporary Heat-Cool-Dehumidification: Provide temporary services required by construction activities, for curing or drying of completed installations or protection of installed construction from adverse effects of low temperatures or high humidity. Select safe equipment that will not have a harmful effect on completed installations or elements being installed. Coordinate temporary services to produce the ambient condition required and minimize consumption of energy. The building’s permanent HVAC systems shall not be used for these purposes. H. Environmental Protection: Provide protection, operate temporary facilities and conduct construction in ways and by methods that comply with environmental regulations, and minimize the possibility that air, waterways and subsoil might be contaminated or polluted, or that other undesirable effects might result. Avoid use of tools and equipment which produce harmful noise. Restrict use of noise making tools and equipment to hours that will minimize complaints from persons or firms near the site. I. Termination and Removal: Unless the Engineer requires that it be maintained longer, remove each temporary facility when the need has ended, or when replaced by authorized use of a permanent facility, or no later than Substantial Completion. Complete or, if necessary, restore permanent construction that may have been delayed because of interference with the temporary facility. Repair damaged Work, clean exposed surfaces and replace construction that cannot be satisfactorily repaired. Materials and facilities that constitute temporary facilities are property of the Contractor. The Owner reserves the right to take possession of Project identification signs. 1.17 EQUIPMENT ACCESS G. Appliances, controls devices, heat exchangers and HVAC system components that utilize energy shall be accessible for inspection, service, repair and replacement without disabling the function of a fire-resistance-rated assembly or removing permanent construction, other appliances, venting systems or any other piping or ducts not connected to the appliance being inspected, serviced, repaired or replaced. A level working space not less than 30 inches deep and 30 inches wide (762 mm by 762 mm) shall be provided in front of the control side to service an appliance. 1.18 BUILDING FLUSH-OUT A. Building flush-out shall begin after construction ends and finishes are installed but prior to building occupancy. Prior to building flush-out, HVAC systems shall be balanced per Specification Section 23 05 93. Flush-out shall not occur until contractor receives permission to proceed from the Owner or Owner’s representative.. B. Building flush-out procedures shall include continuously operating all the building’s new ventilation systems at maximum design outside air flow rates. For constant volume HVAC systems, ventilation systems shall operate at maximum design supply air flow rates. University of Connecticut GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MECHANICAL TRADES 23 0400 -15 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 C. LEED REQUIREMENTS 1. Path 1. Before occupancy a. Install new filtration media and perform a building flush-out by supplying a total air volume of 14,000 cubic feet of outdoor air per square foot of gross floor area while maintaining an internal temperature of at least 60°F and no higher than 80°F and relative humidity no higher than 60%. Controls contractor to modify sequence of operations to allow for these conditions as needed. 2. Path 2. During occupancy a. If occupancy is desired before the flush-out is completed, the space may be occupied only after delivery of a minimum of 3,500 cubic feet of outdoor air per square foot (1 066 260 liters of outdoor air per square meter) of gross floor area while maintaining an internal temperature of at least 60°F (15°C) and no higher than 80°F (27°C) and relative humidity no higher than 60%. Once the space is occupied, it must be ventilated at a minimum rate of 0.30 cubic foot per minute (cfm) per square foot of outdoor air (1.5 liters per second per square meter of outdoor air) or the design minimum outdoor air rate determined in EQ Prerequisite Minimum Indoor Air Quality Performance, whichever is greater. During each day of the flush-out period, ventilation must begin at least three hours before occupancy and continue during occupancy. These conditions must be maintained until a total of 14,000 cubic feet per square foot of outdoor air (4 267 140 liters of outdoor air per square meter) has been delivered to the space. D. Contractor shall include hourly trend log and record during duration of building flush out. E. Log to include hours, airflow, temperature, and RH% of space and be summarized to confirm performance. F. Install new filtration media at end of flush-out and reset controls sequence of operation as needed. G. Contractor shall include hourly log and record during duration of building flush out. H. Log to include hours, airflow, temperature, and RH% of space and be summarized to confirm performance. I. Install new filtration media at end of flush-out and reset controls sequence of operation as needed. 1.19 PROJECT PHASING A. Work under each Section shall include all necessary temporary connections, equipment, piping, heating, temperature control work, fire stopping, water heaters, labor, and material as necessary to accommodate the phasing of Construction as developed by the General Contractor or Construction Manager and approved by the Owner. All existing systems that pass-thru an area of the building shall remain operational during all phases of construction. No extra compensation shall be granted the Contractor for work required to maintain existing systems operational or to accommodate the construction phasing of the project. 1.20 PROTECTION OF MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT University of Connecticut GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MECHANICAL TRADES 23 0400 -16 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 A. Work under each Section shall include protecting the work and material of all other Sections from damage by work or workpeople and shall include making good all damage thus caused. B. The Contractor shall be responsible for work and equipment until the facility has been accepted by the Owner. Protect work against theft, injury or damage and carefully store material and equipment received on site which is not immediately installed. Close open ends of work with temporary covers or plugs during construction to prevent entry of foreign material. C. Work under each Section includes receiving, unloading, uncrating, storing, protecting, setting in place and completely connecting equipment supplied under each Section. Work under each Section shall also include exercising special care in handling and protecting equipment and fixtures, and shall include the cost of replacing any of the equipment and fixtures which are missing or damaged. D. Equipment and material stored on the job site shall be protected from the weather, vehicles, dirt and/or damage by tradespeople or machinery. Insure that all electrical or absorbent equipment or material is protected from moisture during storage. 1.21 ADJUSTING AND TESTING A. After all the equipment and accessories to be furnished are in place, they shall be put in final adjustment and subjected to such operating tests so as to assure the Engineer that they are in proper adjustment and in satisfactory, permanent operating condition. B. Where requested by the Engineer, a factory-trained service representative shall inspect the installation and assist in the initial startup and adjustment to the equipment. The period of these services shall be for such time as necessary to secure proper installation and adjustments. After the equipment is placed in permanent operation, the service representative shall supervise the initial operation of the equipment and instruct personnel responsible for operation and maintenance of the equipment. The service representative shall notify the Contractor in writing that the equipment was installed according to manufacturer’s recommendations and is operating as intended by the manufacturer. 1.22 CLEANING A. The Contractor shall thoroughly clean and flush all piping, ducts and equipment of all foreign substances, oils, burrs, solder, flux, etc., inside and out before being placed in operation. B. If any part of a system should be stopped or damaged by any foreign matter after being placed in operation, the system shall be disconnected, cleaned and reconnected wherever necessary to locate and/or remove obstructions. Any work damaged in the course of removing obstructions shall be repaired or replaced when the system is reconnected at no additional cost to the Owner. C. During the course of construction, all ducts and pipes shall be capped in an acceptable manner to insure adequate protection against the entrance of foreign matter. D. Upon completion of all work under the Contract, the Contractor shall remove from the premises all rubbish, debris and excess materials left over from his work. Any oil or grease stains on floor areas caused by the Contractor shall be removed and floor areas left clean. University of Connecticut GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MECHANICAL TRADES 23 0400 -17 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 E. Complete the following cleaning operations before requesting inspection for Certification of Substantial Completion. 1. Remove labels that are not permanent labels. 2. Clean transparent materials, including mirrors and glass in doors and windows. Remove glazing compound and other substances that are noticeable vision-obscuring materials. Replace chipped or broken glass and other damaged transparent materials. 3. Clean exposed exterior and interior hard-surfaced finishes to a dust-free condition, free of stains, films and similar foreign substances. Restore reflective surfaces to their original reflective condition. Leave concrete floors broom clean. Vacuum carpeted surfaces. 4. Wipe surfaces of mechanical and electrical equipment. Remove excess lubrication and other substances. Clean plumbing fixtures to a sanitary condition. Clean light fixtures and lamps. F. Comply with regulations of authorities having jurisdiction and safety standards for cleaning. Do not burn waste materials. Do not bury debris or excess materials on the Owner's property. Do not discharge volatile, harmful or dangerous materials into drainage systems. Remove and dispose of ALL waste materials, packaging material, skids etc. from the site and dispose of in a lawful manner in accordance with municipal, state and federal regulations. G. Where extra materials of value remaining after completion of associated Work have become the Owner's property, arrange for disposition of these materials as directed. 1.23 OPERATING AND MAINTENANCE A. Upon completion of all work and tests, the Contractor shall furnish the necessary skilled labor and helpers for operating his system and equipment for a period specified under each applicable Section of this Division. During this period, the contractor shall fully instruct the Owner or the Owner’s representative in the operation, adjustment and maintenance of all equipment furnished. The Contractor shall give at least seven (7) days notice to the Owner and the Engineer in advance of this period. B. The Contractor shall include the maintenance schedule for the principal items of equipment furnished under this Division. C. The Contractor shall physically demonstrate procedures for all routine maintenance of all equipment furnished under each respective Section to assure accessibility to all devices. D. An authorized manufacturer’s representative shall attest in writing that the equipment has been properly installed prior to startup of any major equipment. The following equipment will require this inspection: pumps; air conditioning equipment, controls, air handling equipment, compressors, boilers etc. These letters shall be bound into the operating and maintenance books. E. Refer to individual trade Sections for any other particular requirements related to operating instructions. F. Demonstration shall be recorded on USB Flash drive turned over to the Owner. Video recording shall be done in a professional manner with quality video (1080p resolution) and clear audible sound. University of Connecticut GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MECHANICAL TRADES 23 0400 -18 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1.24 OPERATING AND MAINTENANCE MANUALS A. Prepare operating and maintenance manuals in accordance with the requirements of Division 1 and as follows. The Contractor shall prepare up to six (6) copies of a complete maintenance and operating instructions manual, bound in booklet form. Organize operating and maintenance data into suitable sets of manageable size. Bind properly indexed data in individual heavy-duty 3-ring vinyl-covered binders, with pocket folders for folded sheet information and designation partitions with identification tabs. Mark appropriate identification on front and spine of each binder. B. Manual shall include the following: 1. Description of function, normal operating characteristics and limitations, performance curves, engineering data and tests, and complete nomenclature and commercial numbers of replacement parts. 2. Manufacturer's printed operating procedures to include start-up, break-in, and routine and normal operating instructions; regulation, control, stopping, shutdown, and emergency instructions; and summer and winter operating instructions. 3. Maintenance procedures for routine preventative maintenance and troubleshooting; disassembly, repair, and reassembly; aligning and adjusting instructions. 4. Servicing and operating instructions including lubrication charts and schedules. 5. Emergency and safety instructions. 6. Spare parts list. 7. Copies of warranties. 8. Wiring diagrams. 9. Recommended "turn around" cycles. 10. Inspection procedures. 11. Approved Shop Drawings and Product Data. 12. Equipment Start-up Reports. 13. Temperature control diagrams and written sequences of operations. 14. Balance reports. C. Include in the manual, a tabulated equipment schedule for all equipment. Schedule shall include pertinent data such as: make, model number, serial number, voltage, normal operating current, belt size, filter quantities and sizes, bearing number, etc. Schedule shall include maintenance to be done and frequency. D. Maintenance and instruction manuals shall be submitted to the Owner at the same time as the seven (7) day notice is given prior to the instruction period. 1.25 ACCEPTANCES A. The equipment, materials, quality, design and arrangement of all work installed under the Mechanical Sections shall be subject to the review of the Engineer. B. Within 30 days after the awarding of a Contract, the Mechanical Contractor shall submit to the Engineer, for review, a list of manufacturers of equipment proposed for the work under the Mechanical Sections. The intent to use the exact manufacturers and models specified does not relieve the Contractor of the responsibility of submitting such a list. University of Connecticut GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MECHANICAL TRADES 23 0400 -19 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 C. If extensive or unacceptable delivery time is expected on a particular item of equipment specified, the Contractor shall notify the Owner and Engineer, in writing, within 30 days of award of the Contract. In such instances, equipment substitutions may be made pending acceptance by the Engineer or the Owner’s representative. D. Where any specific material, process or method of construction or manufactured article is specified by reference to the catalog number of a manufacturer, the Specifications are to be used as a guide and are not intended to take precedence over the basic duty and performance specified or noted on the Drawings. In all cases, the Mechanical Contractor shall verify the duty specified with the specific characteristics of the equipment offered for review. Equipment characteristics are to be used as mandatory requirements where the Contractor proposes to use an acceptable equivalent. E. If material or equipment is installed before it is reviewed and/or approved, the Contractor shall be liable for its removal and replacement at no extra charge to the Owner if, in the opinion of the Engineer, the material or equipment does not meet the intent of, or standard of quality implied by, the Drawings and Specifications. F. Failure on the part of the Engineer to reject shop drawings or to reject work in progress shall not be interpreted as acceptance of work not in conformance with the Drawings and/or Specifications. Work not in conformance with the Drawings and/or Specifications shall be corrected whenever it is discovered. 1.26 RECORD DRAWINGS A. General: Do not use record documents for construction purposes; protect from deterioration and loss in a secure, fire-resistive location; provide access to record documents for the Engineer's reference during normal working hours. B. Maintain a clean, undamaged set of blue or black line white-prints of Contract Drawings and Shop Drawings. Mark the set to show the actual installation where the installation varies substantially from the Work as originally shown. Mark whichever drawing is most capable of showing conditions fully and accurately. Give particular attention to concealed elements that would be difficult to measure and record at a later date. Items to be indicated include but are not limited to: 1. Dimensional change 2. Revision to drawing detail 3. Location and depth of underground utility 4. Revision to pipe routing 5. Revision to electrical circuitry 6. Actual equipment location 7. Duct size and routing 8. Location of concealed internal utility 9. Changes made by Change Order 10. Details not on original Contract Drawing 11. Information on concealed elements which would be difficult to identify or measure later C. Mark record sets with red erasable pencil; use other colors to distinguish between variations in separate categories of the Work. D. Mark new information that is important to the Owner, but was not shown on Contract Drawings or Shop Drawings. University of Connecticut GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MECHANICAL TRADES 23 0400 -20 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 E. Note related Change Order numbers where applicable. F. Organize record drawing sheets into manageable sets, bind with durable paper cover sheets, and print suitable titles, dates and other identification on the cover of each set. G. Final record documents shall be prepared in the latest electronic version and on USB Flash drive of all drawings and a clean set of reproducible paper copies shall be turned over to the Owner at the completion of the work. 1.27 WARRANTIES AND BONDS A. The following general administrative and procedural requirements for warranties and bonds required by the Contract Documents, including manufacturers standard warranties on products and special warranties are to be included: 1. General close-out requirements included in Division 1. 2. Specific requirements for warranties for the Work and products and installation that are specified to be warranted, are included in the individual Sections of Divisions-2 through -50. 3. Certifications and other commitments and agreements for continuing services to Owner are specified elsewhere in the Contract Documents. B. Disclaimers and Limitations: Manufacturer's disclaimers and limitations on product warranties do not relieve the Contractor of the warranty on the Work that incorporates the products, nor does it relieve suppliers, manufacturers, and subcontractors required to countersign special warranties with the Contractor. C. Separate Prime Contracts: Each prime Contractor is responsible for warranties related to its own Contract. 1.28 WARRANTY REQUIREMENTS A. Related Damages and Losses: When correcting warranted Work that has failed, remove and replace other Work that has been damaged as a result of such failure or that must be removed and replaced to provide access for correction of warranted Work. B. Reinstatement of Warranty: When Work covered by a warranty has failed and been corrected by replacement or rebuilding, reinstate the warranty by written endorsement. The reinstated warranty shall be equal to the original warranty with an equitable adjustment for depreciation. C. Replacement Cost: Upon determination that Work covered by a warranty has failed, replace or rebuild the Work to an acceptable condition complying with requirements of Contract Documents. The Contractor is responsible for the cost of replacing or rebuilding defective Work regardless of whether the Owner has benefited from use of the Work through a portion of its anticipated useful service life. D. Owner's Recourse: Written warranties made to the Owner are in addition to implied warranties, and shall not limit the duties, obligations, right and remedies otherwise available under the law, nor shall warranty periods be interpreted as limitations on time in which the Owner can enforce such other duties, obligations, rights, or remedies. E. Rejection of Warranties: The Owner reserves the right to reject warranties and to limit selections to products with warranties not in conflict with requirements of the Contract Documents. University of Connecticut GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MECHANICAL TRADES 23 0400 -21 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 F. The Owner reserves the right to refuse to accept Work for the Project where a special warranty, certification, or similar commitment is required on such Work or part of the Work, until evidence is presented that entities required to countersign such commitments are willing to do so. G. Submit written warranties to the Engineer prior to the date certified for Substantial Completion. If the Engineer's Certificate of Substantial Completion designates a commencement date for warranties other than the date of Substantial Completion for the Work, or a designated portion of the Work, submit written warranties upon request of the Engineer. H. When a designated portion of the Work is completed and occupied or used by the Owner, by separate agreement with the Contractor during the construction period, submit properly executed warranties to the Engineer within fifteen days of completion of that designated portion of the Work. I. When a special warranty is required to be executed by the Contractor, or the Contractor and a subcontractor, supplier or manufacturer, prepare a written document that contains appropriate terms and identification, ready for execution by the required parties. Submit a draft to the Owner through the Engineer for approval prior to final execution. 1. Refer to individual Sections of Divisions-2 through -50 for specific content requirements, and particular requirements for submittal of special warranties. J. Form of Submittal: At Final Completion compile two copies of each required warranty and bond properly executed by the Contractor, or by the Contractor, subcontractor, supplier, or manufacturer. Organize the warranty documents into an orderly sequence based on the table of contents of the Project Manual. K. Bind warranties and bonds in heavy-duty, commercial quality, durable 3-ring vinyl covered loose-leaf binders, thickness as necessary to accommodate contents, and sized to receive 8-1/2" by 11" paper. 1. Provide heavy paper dividers with celluloid covered tabs for each separate warranty. Mark the tab to identify the product or installation. Provide a typed description of the product or installation, including the name of the product, and the name, address and telephone number of the installer. 2. Identify each binder on the front and the spine with the typed or printed title "WARRANTIES AND BONDS," the Project title or name, and the name of the Contractor. 3. When operating and maintenance manuals are required for warranted construction, provide additional copies of each required warranty, as necessary, for inclusion in each required manual. 1.29 GUARANTEES A. The Contractor shall guarantee all material and installation quality under these Specifications and the Contract for a period of one (1) year from the date of final acceptance by Owner. During this guarantee period, all defects developing through faulty equipment, materials or installation quality shall be corrected or replaced immediately by this Contractor without expense to the Owner. Such repairs or replacements shall be made to the Engineer's satisfaction. University of Connecticut GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MECHANICAL TRADES 23 0400 -22 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 B. Contractor shall provide name, address, and phone number of all contractors and subcontractors and associated equipment they provided. 1.30 PROJECT CLOSE-OUT A. Submit specific warranties, quality bonds, maintenance agreements, final certifications and similar documents in accordance with Division 1. B. Deliver tools, spare parts, extra stock, and similar items. C. Complete start-up testing of systems, including measuring and documenting all required startup checklist requirements documented in installation and maintenance instructions by the equipment manufacturer, and instruction of the Owner's operating and maintenance personnel. Discontinue or change over and remove temporary facilities from the site, along with construction tools, mock-ups, and similar elements. D. Complete final clean up requirements, including touch-up painting. Touch-up and otherwise repair and restore marred exposed finishes. E. Field Observation Procedures: On receipt of a request for an Engineers Field Observation, the Engineer will advise the Contractor of unfulfilled requirements. The Engineer will advise the Contractor of construction that must be completed or corrected before the certificate will be issued. Contractor shall submit written response to each corrective item including specific photos prior to final Engineering inspection. 1. The Engineer will repeat the Field Observation when requested and assured that the Work has been substantially completed. 2. Results of the completed list of unfulfilled items will form the basis of requirements for final acceptance. END OF SECTION University of Connecticut GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MECHANICAL TRADES 23 0400 -23 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 Electronic Drawing File Release Form DELIVERY OF FILES FOR: Project Name In accepting and utilizing any drawings or other data on any form of electronic media generated and provided by the Design Professional, the Client covenants and agrees that all such drawings and data are instruments of service of the Design Professional, who shall be deemed the author of the drawings and data, and shall retain all common law, statutory law and other rights, including copyrights. The Client further agrees not to use these drawings and data, in whole or in part, for any purpose or project other than the project which is the subject of this Agreement. The Client agrees to waive all claims against the Design Professional resulting in any way from any unauthorized changes or reuse of the drawings and data for any other project by anyone other than the Design Professional. In addition, the Client agrees, to the fullest extent permitted by law, to indemnify and hold the Design Professional harmless from any damage, liability or cost, including reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs of defense, arising from any changes made by anyone other than the Design Professional or from any reuse of the drawings and data without the prior written consent of the Design Professional. Under no circumstances shall transfer of the drawings and other instruments of service on electronic media for use by the Client be deemed a sale by the Design Professional, and the Design Professional makes no warranties, either express or implied, of merchantability and fitness for any particular purpose. Client’s Signature Date University of Connecticut GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR MECHANICAL TRADES 23 0400 -24 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 Company -Title Architects’ Signature Date Firm -Title Owner’s Signature Date Company -Title University of Connecticut EXPANSION FITTINGS AND LOOPS FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0516 - 1 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 SECTION 23 0516 EXPANSION FITTINGS AND LOOPS FOR HVAC PIPING PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Design of expansion systems and anchors B. Flexible pipe connectors. C. Expansion joints and compensators. D. Pipe Alignment Guides E. Swivel Joints F. Pipe Anchors 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this section. B. Division 23 specifications 1.03 REFERENCE STANDARDS (FOLLOW THE MOST CURRENTLY ADOPTED AMENDED VERSION) A. ASME B16.1 - Gray Iron Pipe Flanges and Flanged Fittings: Classes 25, 125, and 250. B. ASME B16.5 - Pipe Flanges and Flanged Fittings NPS 1/2 through NPS 24 Inch Standard. C. ASME B16.11 - Forged Fittings, Socket-welding and Threaded. D. ASME B31.9 – Building Services Piping E. ASME Section IX – Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code- Welding and Brazing Qualifications. F. ASTM A269/A269M - Standard Specification for Seamless and Welded Austenitic Stainless Steel Tubing for General Service. G. AWS D1.1 – Structural Welding Code- Steel. H. EJMA (STDS) - EJMA Standards. I. FM (AG) - FM Approval Guide. J. ITS (DIR) - Directory of Listed Products. K. UL (DIR) - Online Certifications Directory. 1.04 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS A. Provide design, details, work and equipment required for expansion and contraction of hot water and steam piping systems. Verify anchors, guides, and expansion joints provide and adequately protect system. B. Provide structural work and equipment required for expansion and contraction of piping. Verify anchors, guides, and expansion joints provide and adequately protect system. C. Expansion Compensation Design Criteria: 1. Installation Temperature: 50°F. 2. Hot Water Heating System Temperature: 210°F. University of Connecticut EXPANSION FITTINGS AND LOOPS FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0516 - 2 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 3. Low/ Medium Pressure Steam Temperature: 320°F. 4. High Pressure Steam Temperature: 400°F. 5. Refrigerant System Temperature: Refer to manufacturers design literature. 6. Safety Factor: 30%. 1.05 SUBMITTALS A. Pipe Expansion Analysis, Design and Certification: 1. Provide pipe expansion and anchoring calculations for all refrigerant, steam and hot water piping systems including connections to equipment and to the structure. Piping layouts and associated calculations must be stamped by a registered professional engineer with at least five years of pipe expansion experience, licensed in the state of the job location. 2. Analysis must indicate calculated dead loads, active expansion loads and capacity of materials utilized for connections to equipment and structure. Analysis must detail anchoring methods, bolt diameter, embedment and/ or welded length. All expansion and anchoring devices shall be designed to accept the forces as calculated. B. Shop Drawings: Indicate layout of piping systems, including flexible connectors, expansion joints, expansion compensators, loops, offsets and swing joints. Indicate installed locations of flexible pipe connectors, expansion joints, anchors and guides. C. Product Data: 1. Flexible Pipe Connectors:  Indicate maximum temperature and pressure rating, face-to-face length, live length, hose wall thickness, hose convolutions per foot and per assembly, fundamental frequency of assembly, braid structure, and total number of wires in braid. 2. Expansion Joints:  Indicate maximum temperature and pressure rating, and maximum expansion compensation. D. Manufacturer's Instructions:  Indicate manufacturer's installation instructions, special procedures, and external controls. E. Maintenance Data:  Include adjustment instructions. F. Maintenance Materials:  Furnish the following for Owner's use in maintenance of project. 1. Extra Packing for Packed Expansion Joints:  One set for each joint. 1.06 QUALIFICATIONS A. Manufacturer: Company specializing in manufacturing products specified in this section with minimum five years’ experience. B. Installer: Company specializing in performing work of this section with minimum five years’ experience. C. Design expansion compensating system under direct supervision of a Professional Engineer experienced in design of this work and licensed in state which the work will occur. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 MANUFACTURERS: A. Mason Industries University of Connecticut EXPANSION FITTINGS AND LOOPS FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0516 - 3 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 B. The Metraflex Company C. UniSource Manufacturing 2.02 FLEXIBLE PIPE CONNECTORS - STEEL PIPING A. Inner Hose: Bronze. B. Exterior Sleeve:  Single braided, stainless steel. C. Pressure & Temperature Rating:  125 psi and 450°F. D. Joint: Flanged. E. Size: Use pipe sized units. F. Maximum offset: 3/4 inch on each side of installed center line. 2.03 FLEXIBLE PIPE CONNECTORS - COPPER PIPING SERVING WATER SYSTEMS A. Inner Hose: Bronze. B. Exterior Sleeve:  Braided bronze. C. Pressure & Temperature Rating:  125 psi and 450°F. D. Joint: Flanged. E. Size: Use pipe sized units. F. Maximum offset: 3/4 inch on each side of installed center line. G. Application:  Copper piping serving water-based systems. 2.04 FLEXIBLE PIPE CONNECTORS - COPPER PIPING SERVING REFRIGERANT SYSTEMS A. Inner Hose:  Stainless Steel. B. Exterior Sleeve:  Braided 304 Stainless Steel C. Pressure Rating:  650 psi. D. Joint: Brazed. E. Size: Use pipe sized units. F. Maximum offset: 3/4 inch on each side of installed center line. G. Application:  Refrigerant Piping. H. Certifications: UL Listed for Refrigeration Service. 2.05 EXPANSION JOINTS - STAINLESS STEEL BELLOWS TYPE A. Pressure & Temperature Rating:  125 psi and 400°F. B. Maximum Compression:  1-3/4 inches. C. Maximum Extension:  1/4 inch. D. Joint: Flanged. E. Size: Use pipe sized units. F. Application:  Steel piping 3 inches and under. 2.06 EXPANSION JOINTS - EXTERNAL RING CONTROLLED STAINLESS STEEL BELLOWS TYPE A. Pressure & Temperature Rating:  125 psi and 400°F. B. Maximum Compression:  15/16 inch. C. Maximum Extension:  5/16 inch. University of Connecticut EXPANSION FITTINGS AND LOOPS FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0516 - 4 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 D. Maximum Offset:  1/8 inch. E. Joint: Flanged. F. Size: Use pipe sized units. G. Accessories:  Internal flow liner. H. Application:  Steel piping over 2 inches. 2.07 EXPANSION JOINTS - DOUBLE SPHERE, FLEXIBLE COMPENSATOR A. Body: Multi-Layered Kevlar with EPDM. B. Pressure & Temperature Rating, Sizes 3/4 Inch to 1-1/4” Inch:  150 psi and 210°F. C. Pressure & Temperature Rating, Sizes 1-1/2 Inch to 12 Inch:  150 psi and 250°F. D. Pressure & Temperature Rating, Sizes 14 Inch to 24 Inch:  105 psi and 250°F. E. Maximum Compression:  1/2 inch. F. Maximum Elongation:  3/8 inch. G. Maximum Offset:  3/8 inch. H. Maximum Angular Movement:  15 degrees. I. Joint: Tapped steel flanges. J. Size: Use pipe sized units. K. Accessories:  Control cables. L. Application:  Steel piping 2 inches and over. 2.08 EXPANSION JOINTS - TWO-PLY BRONZE BELLOWS TYPE A. Construction:  Bronze with anti-torque device, limit stops, internal guides. B. Pressure & Temperature Rating:  125 psi and 400°F. C. Maximum Compression:  1-3/4 inches. D. Maximum Extension:  1/4 inch. E. Joint: Soldered. F. Size: Use pipe sized units. G. Application:  Copper piping. 2.09 EXPANSION JOINTS - LOW PRESSURE COMPENSATOR WITH TWO-PLY BRONZE BELLOWS A. Working Pressure:  75 psi. B. Maximum Temperatures:  250°F. C. Maximum Compression:  1/2 inch. D. Maximum Extension:  5/32 inch. E. Joint: Soldered. F. Size: Use pipe sized units. G. Application:  Copper or steel piping 3 inches and under. 2.10 EXPANSION JOINTS - STEEL WITH PACKED SLIDING SLEEVE A. Working Pressure and Temperature:  Class 150. University of Connecticut EXPANSION FITTINGS AND LOOPS FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0516 - 5 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 B. Joint: Flanged. C. Size: Use pipe sized units. D. Application:  Steel piping 2 inches and over. 2.11 EXPANSION JOINTS - COPPER WITH PACKED SLIDING SLEEVE A. Working Pressure:  125 psi. B. Maximum Temperature:  250°F. C. Joint: Flanged. D. Size: Use pipe sized units. E. Application:  Copper or steel piping 2 inches and over. 2.12 EXPANSION LOOPS - HOSE AND BRAID A. Provide flexible loops with two flexible sections of hose and braid, two 90 degree elbows, and 180 degree return with support bracket and air release or drain plug. B. Provide flexible loops capable of movement in the x, y, and z planes.  Flexible loops to impart no thrust loads to the building structure. C. Flexible Connectors:  Flanged, braided type with wetted components of stainless steel, sized to match piping. 1. Maximum Allowable Working Pressure & Temperature:  150 psig at 120°F. 2. Accommodate the Following: a. Axial Deflection in Compression and Expansion:  To be determined by the Professional Engineer providing calculations. b. Lateral Movement:  To be determined by the Professional Engineer providing calculations. c. Angular Rotation:  15 degrees. d. Force developed by 1.5 times specified maximum allowable operating pressure. 3. End Connections:  Same as specified for pipe jointing. 4. End Connections:  Flanged ductile iron; complying with ASME B16.1 Class 125. 5. End Connections:  Threaded; complying with ASME B16.11. 6. Provide necessary accessories including, but not limited to, swivel joints. 2.13 EXPANSION JOINTS - EXTERNALLY PRESSURIZED EXPANSION JOINTS A. Construction:  Stainless steel with anti-torque device, limit stops, internal guides. B. Maximum Allowable Working Pressure & Temperature:  150 psig at 700°F. C. Maximum Axial Compression:  4 inches. D. End Connections:  Flanged by weld end. E. Size: Use pipe sized units. F. Application:  Steel piping 2 inches and over. 2.14 PIPE ALIGNMENT GUIDES A. Two piece welded steel with enamel paint, bolted, with spider to fit standard pipe, frame with four mounting holes, clearance for minimum 1 inch thick insulation, minimum 3 inches travel 2.15 SWIVEL JOINTS University of Connecticut EXPANSION FITTINGS AND LOOPS FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0516 - 6 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 A. Fabricated steel body, double ball bearing race, field lubricated, with rubber (Buna-N) o- ring seals. 2.16 PIPE ANCHORS A. All-directional acoustical pipe anchor, consisting of two sizes of steel tubing separated by a minimum 1/2" thick 60 durometer neoprene. Vertical restraint shall be provided by similar material arranged to prevent vertical travel in either direction. Allowable loads on the isolation material should not exceed 500 PSI and the design shall be balanced for equal resistance in any direction. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 INSTALLATION A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Install in accordance with EJMA (Expansion Joint Manufacturers Association) Standards. C. Install flexible pipe connectors on: 1. Pipes connected to pumps. 2. Refrigerant piping connections to equipment per recommendations of equipment manufacturer. 3. Pipes connected to equipment supported by vibration isolation. Provide line size flexible connectors. D. Install flexible connectors at right angles to displacement. Install one end immediately adjacent to isolated equipment and anchor other end.  Install in horizontal plane unless indicated otherwise. E. Rigidly anchor pipe to building structure. Provide pipe guides so movement is directed along axis of pipe only.  Erect piping such that strain and weight is not on cast connections or apparatus. F. Provide support and anchors for controlling expansion and contraction of piping. Provide loops, pipe offsets, and swing joints, or expansion joints where required. G. For systems using grooved piping systems, provide with minimum one joint per inch pipe diameter instead of flexible connector supported by vibration isolation. H. Provide piping expansion loops at all building expansion joints as indicated on drawings. I. Provide piping expansion joints or expansion loops as indicated below: 1. Provide and install pipe expansion joints or expansion loops at all conditions listed below and as required to minimize stress on the piping systems. 2. Provide pipe guides at inlet and outlet of each expansion joint and expansion loop. 3. Where expansion joints or loops are required, provide pipe anchors at ends of each straight length of run. 4. Provide and install expansion joints, expansion loops, pipe guides and anchors per ASHRAE guidelines and manufacturer’s recommendations. University of Connecticut EXPANSION FITTINGS AND LOOPS FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0516 - 7 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 PIPING SYSTEM  PIPING MATERIAL  PIPE SIZE  Condition Requiring expansion joint or expansion loop (all conditions assume “offset leg” at end of runs are minimum 12’0” long)  Hot water supply and return (all temperatures)  Copper  Up to 3 inches  All straight sections of piping over 90’ long. All straight sections of piping where “offset leg” is less than 12’0”  Hot water supply and return Steam supply and return (all temperatures)  Steel  Up to 2 inches  All straight sections of piping over 140’ long.  Hot water supply and return Steam supply and return (all temperatures)  Steel  2” to 4”  All straight sections of piping over 90’ long  Hot water supply and return Steam supply and return (all temperatures)  Steel  5” to 8”  All straight sections of piping over 45’ long  END OF SECTION University of Connecticut SLEEVES AND SLEEVE SEALS FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0517 -1 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 SECTION 23 0517 SLEEVES AND SLEEVE SEALS FOR HVAC PIPING PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Pipe sleeves. B. Manufactured sleeve-seal systems. 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this section. B. Division 07 – Thermal and Moisture Protection. C. Division 09 -Finishes. D. Section 23 0523 -General-Duty Valves for HVAC Piping. E. Section 23 0553 -Identification for HVAC Piping and Equipment: Piping identification. F. Section 23 0700 -HVAC Insulation. 1.03 REFERENCE STANDARDS (FOLLOW THE MOST CURRENTLY ADOPTED AMENDED VERSION) A. ASTM C592 -Standard Specification for Mineral Fiber Blanket Insulation and Blanket-Type Pipe Insulation (Metal-Mesh Covered) (Industrial Type). B. ASTM E814 -Standard Test Method for Fire Tests of Penetration Firestop Systems. 1.04 SUBMITTALS A. Shop Drawings: Indicate pipe materials used, jointing methods, supports, floor and wall penetration seals. Indicate installation, layout, weights, mounting and support details, and piping connections. B. Maintenance Materials: Furnish the following for Owner's use in maintenance of project. 1. Extra Valve Stem Packings: Two for each type and size of valve. 1.05 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Manufacturer Qualifications: Company specializing in manufacturing the Products specified in this section with minimum three years documented experience. B. Installer Qualifications: Company specializing in performing work of the type specified this section. 1. Minimum three years experience. 2. Approved by manufacturer. C. Clean equipment, pipes, valves, and fittings of grease, metal cuttings, and sludge that may have accumulated from the installation and testing of the system. 1.06 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Deliver and store sleeve and sleeve seals in shipping containers, with labeling in place. B. Provide temporary protective coating on cast iron and steel sleeves if shipped loose. 1.07 WARRANTY A. Correct defective Work within a five year period after Date of Substantial Completion. University of Connecticut SLEEVES AND SLEEVE SEALS FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0517 -2 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 PIPE SLEEVES A. Materials 1. Galvanized-Steel Sheet: 0.0239-inch 0.6-mm minimum thickness; round tube closed with longitudinal joint. 2. Steel Pipe: ASTM A 53, Type E, Grade B, Schedule 40, galvanized, plain ends. 2.02 MANUFACTURED SLEEVE-SEAL SYSTEMS A. Manufacturers: 1. Flexicraft Industries; PipeSeal. 2. Metraflex 3. Link-Seal 4. Substitutions: See Division -01 General Requirements. B. Modular/Mechanical Seal: 1. Synthetic rubber interlocking links continuously fill annular space between pipe and wall/casing opening. 2. Provide watertight seal between pipe and wall/casing opening. 3. Elastomer element size and material in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. 4. Glass reinforced plastic pressure end plates. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 GENERAL A. Lay out penetration and sleeve openings in advance, to permit provision in work. Coordinate work with architectural and structural work. Set sleeves and conduit in forms before concrete is poured. Provide remedial work where sleeves and conduits are omitted or improperly placed. Remedial work includes core drilling (see requirements below) for penetrations if walls are poured, or otherwise constructed, without required sleeves. Provide core drilling (see requirements below) of existing construction. Do not penetrate structural members without Structural Engineer’s/Architect's written approval. B. Sleeve installation shall meet NFPA-101 requirements, UL rated assemblies requirements, and materials requirements of these specifications. Submit a list of the UL listed details that the Contractor intends on using on this project in all rated assemblies. C. Sleeves that penetrate outside walls, basement slabs, footings and beams shall be waterproof. Sleeves that penetrate floors shall be fireproof and waterproof. D. Identify unused sleeves and slots for future installation. Fill slots, sleeves and other openings in floors or walls if not used. Fill spaces in openings after installation of pipe, duct, conduit or cable. Fill for floor penetrations shall prevent passage of water, smoke, fire, and fumes. Fill shall be fire resistant in fire floors and walls, and shall prevent passage of air, smoke and fumes. E. Do not support piping risers or conduit on sleeves. F. Fire-Barrier Penetrations: Maintain indicated fire rating of walls, partitions, ceilings, and floors at pipe penetrations. Seal pipe penetrations with firestop materials. Refer to Division 7 for materials. University of Connecticut SLEEVES AND SLEEVE SEALS FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0517 -3 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 G. Refer to equipment specifications in other Sections of these Specifications for roughing-in requirements. Verify final equipment locations for roughing-in. 3.02 PREPARATION A. Ream pipe and tube ends. Remove burrs. Bevel plain end ferrous pipe. B. Remove scale and foreign material, from inside and outside, before assembly. 3.03 APPLICATIONS A. Provide sleeves when penetrating footings, floors, walls, partitions, and other building components as follows: 1. Interior walls, partitions, and floors: galvanized-steel sheet, unless steel or brass sleeves are specified elsewhere. 2. Below Grade Exterior Walls: Zinc coated or cast iron pipe with mechanical sleeve seals. Provide watertight space with link rubber or modular seal between sleeve and pipe on both pipe ends. 3. Above Grade Exterior Walls: steel pipe sleeve with mechanical sleeve seals. 4. Mechanical, Laundry, and Animal Room Floors above Basement: Galvanized steel pipe or black iron pipe with asphalt coating. Connect sleeve with floor plate except in mechanical rooms. 5. Concrete and masonry walls, concrete floor and roof slabs: galvanized-steel sheet 6. Floors with membrane waterproofing: stack sleeve fittings 3.04 INSTALLATION A. Route piping in orderly manner, plumb and parallel to building structure. Maintain gradient. B. Install piping to conserve building space, to not interfere with use of space and other work. C. Install piping and pipe sleeves to allow for expansion and contraction without stressing pipe, joints, or connected equipment. D. Install sleeves that are large enough to provide 1/4 inch annular clear space between sleeve and pipe or pipe insulation. Sleeves for insulated pipe and duct in non-fire rated construction shall accommodate continuous insulation without compression. Sleeves and/or penetrations in fire rated construction shall be packed with fire rated material that shall maintain the fire rating of the wall. Seal ends of penetrations to provide continuous vapor barrier where insulation is interrupted. E. Where pipes passing through openings are exposed in finished rooms, finishes of filling materials shall match and be flush with adjoining floor, ceiling, and wall finishes. F. Inserts: 1. Provide inserts for placement in concrete formwork. 2. Provide inserts for suspending hangers from reinforced concrete slabs and sides of reinforced concrete beams. 3. Provide hooked rod to concrete reinforcement section for inserts carrying pipe over 4 inches. 4. Where concrete slabs form finished ceiling, locate inserts flush with slab surface. 5. Where inserts are omitted, drill through concrete slab from below and provide through-bolt with recessed square steel plate and nut above slab. G. Structural Considerations: University of Connecticut SLEEVES AND SLEEVE SEALS FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0517 -4 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1. Do not penetrate building structural members unless indicated. H. Seal pipe including sleeve penetrations to achieve fire resistance equivalent to fire separation required. 1. Underground Piping: Mechanically expandable chloroprene inserts with bitumen sealed metal components. 2. Aboveground Piping: a. Pack solid using mineral fiber conforming to ASTM C592. b. Fill space with an elastomer caulk to a depth of 0.50 inch where penetrations occur between conditioned and unconditioned spaces. 3. All Rated Openings: Caulk tight with fire stopping material conforming to ASTM E814 in accordance with Division 07 to prevent the spread of fire, smoke, and gases. 4. Caulk exterior wall sleeves watertight with Mechanically expandable chloroprene inserts with mastic-sealed components. I. Vertical Piping: 1. Sleeve Length: 1 inch above finished floor. 2. Provide sealant for watertight joint. 3. Blocked Out Floor Openings: Provide 1-1/2 inch angle set in silicon adhesive around opening. 4. Drilled Penetrations: Provide 1-1/2 inch angle ring or square set in silicone adhesive around penetration. J. Clearances: 1. Provide allowance for insulated piping. 2. Wall, Floor, Floor, Partitions, and Beam Flanges: 1 inch greater than external; pipe diameter. 3. All Rated Openings: Caulked tight with fire stopping material conforming to ASTM E814 in accordance with Division 07 to prevent the spread of fire, smoke, and gases. K. Manufactured Sleeve-Seal Systems: 1. Install manufactured sleeve-seal systems in sleeves located in grade slabs and exterior concrete walls at piping entrances into building. 2. Provide sealing elements of the size, quantity, and type required for the piping and sleeve inner diameter or penetration diameter. 3. Locate piping in center of sleeve or penetration. 4. Install field assembled sleeve-seal system components in annular space between sleeve and piping. 5. Tighten bolting for a water-tight seal. 6. Install in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. L. When installing more than one piping system material, ensure system components are compatible and joined to ensure the integrity of the system. Provide necessary joining fittings. Ensure flanges, union, and couplings for servicing are consistently provided. 3.05 CORE DRILLING A. Core drilling shall be avoided in new construction. Set sleeves prior to installation of structure for passage of pipes, conduit and ducts. Where core drilling is unavoidable (e.g. when individual sleeves are not installed or incorrectly located) or required by University of Connecticut SLEEVES AND SLEEVE SEALS FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0517 -5 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 renovation projects, locate required openings prior to coring and submit locations for review. B. Coordinate openings with other Divisions. C. Do not disturb existing systems. Protect areas from damage. D. Thoroughly investigate existing conditions in vicinity of required opening prior to coring. 3.06 CLEANING A. Upon completion of work, clean all parts of the installation. B. Clean equipment, pipes, valves, and fittings of grease, metal cuttings, and sludge that may have accumulated from the installation and testing of the system. END OF SECTION University of Connecticut GENERAL-DUTY VALVES FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0523 - 1 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 SECTION 23 0523 GENERAL-DUTY VALVES FOR HVAC PIPING PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Applications. B. General requirements. C. Angle valves. D. Globe valves. E. Ball valves. F. Butterfly valves. G. Check valves. H. Gate valves. I. Plug valves. J. Chainwheels. 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this section. B. Section 23 04 00 – General Conditions for Mechanical Trades 1.03 ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS A. CWP:  Cold working pressure. B. EPDM: Ethylene propylene copolymer rubber. C. NBR: Acrylonitrile-butadiene, Buna-N, or nitrile rubber. D. NRS: Nonrising stem. E. OS&Y:  Outside screw and yoke. F. PTFE:  Polytetrafluoroethylene. G. RS: Rising stem. H. SWP:  Steam working pressure. I. TFE:  Tetrafluoroethylene. 1.04 REFERENCE STANDARDS (follow the most currently adopted amended version) A. API STD 594 - Check Valves: Flanged, Lug Wafer, and Butt-Welding. B. ASME B1.20.1 - Pipe Threads, General Purpose (Inch). C. ASME B16.1 - Gray Iron Pipe Flanges and Flanged Fittings: Classes 25, 125, and 250;. D. ASME B16.5 - Pipe Flanges and Flanged Fittings NPS 1/2 Through NPS 24 Metric/Inch Standard. E. ASME B16.10 - Face-to-Face and End-to-End Dimensions of Valves. F. ASME B16.18 - Cast Copper Alloy Solder Joint Pressure Fittings. G. ASME B16.34 - Valves - Flanged, Threaded and Welding End. University of Connecticut GENERAL-DUTY VALVES FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0523 - 2 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 H. ASME B31.1 - Power Piping. I. ASME B31.9 - Building Services Piping. J. ASME BPVC-IX - Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Section IX - Welding, Brazing, and Fusing Qualifications. K. ASTM A48/A48M - Standard Specification for Gray Iron Castings. L. ASTM A126 - Standard Specification for Gray Iron Castings for Valves, Flanges, and Pipe Fittings. M. ASTM A216/A216M - Standard Specification for Steel Castings, Carbon, Suitable for Fusion Welding, for High-Temperature Service. N. ASTM A395/A395M - Standard Specification for Ferritic Ductile Iron Pressure-Retaining Castings for Use at Elevated Temperatures. O. ASTM A536 - Standard Specification for Ductile Iron Castings. P. ASTM A582/A582M - Standard Specification for Free-Machining Stainless Steel Bars;. Q. ASTM B61 - Standard Specification for Steam or Valve Bronze Castings. R. ASTM B62 - Standard Specification for Composition Bronze or Ounce Metal Castings. S. AWWA C606 - Grooved and Shouldered Joints. T. MSS SP-45 - Bypass and Drain Connections. U. MSS SP-67 - Butterfly Valves. V. MSS SP-68 - High Pressure Butterfly Valves with Offset Design. W. MSS SP-70 - Cast Iron Gate Valves, Flanged and Threaded Ends. X. MSS SP-71 - Cast Iron Swing Check Valves, Flanged and Threaded Ends. Y. MSS SP-72 - Ball Valves with Flanged or Butt-Welding Ends for General Service. Z. MSS SP-78 - Cast Iron Plug Valves, Flanged and Threaded Ends. AA. MSS SP-80 - Bronze Gate, Globe, Angle and Check Valves. BB. MSS SP-85 - Cast Iron Globe & Angle Valves, Flanged and Threaded Ends. CC. MSS SP-108 - Resilient-Seated Cast Iron Eccentric Plug Valves. DD. MSS SP-110 - Ball Valves Threaded, Socket-Welding, Solder Joint, Grooved and Flared Ends. EE. MSS SP-125 - Gray Iron and Ductile Iron In-Line, Spring-Loaded, Center-Guided Check Valves. 1.05 SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: Provide data on valves including manufacturers catalog information.  Submit performance ratings, rough-in details, weights, support requirements, and piping connections. B. Warranty: Submit manufacturer warranty and ensure that forms have been completed in Owner's name and registered with manufacturer. C. Maintenance Materials:  Furnish Owner with one wrench for every five plug valves, in each size of square plug valve head. University of Connecticut GENERAL-DUTY VALVES FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0523 - 3 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1.06 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Manufacturer: 1. Obtain valves for each valve type from single manufacturer. 2. Company must specialize in manufacturing products specified in this section, with not less than three years of documented experience. B. Welding Materials and Procedures:  Conform to ASME BPVC-IX. 1.07 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Prepare valves for shipping as follows: 1. Minimize exposure of operable surfaces by setting plug and ball valves to open position. 2. Protect valve parts exposed to piped medium against rust and corrosion. 3. Protect valve piping connections such as grooves, weld ends, threads, and flange faces. 4. Adjust globe, gate, and angle valves to the closed position to avoid clattering. 5. Secure check valves in either the closed position or open position. 6. Adjust butterfly valves to closed or partially closed position. B. Use the following precautions during storage: 1. Maintain valve end protection and protect flanges and specialties from dirt. a. Provide temporary inlet and outlet caps. b. Maintain caps in place until installation. 2. Store valves in shipping containers and maintain in place until installation. a. Store valves indoors in dry environment. b. Store valves off the ground in watertight enclosures when indoor storage is not an option. C. Exercise the following precautions for handling: 1. Handle large valves with sling, modified to avoid damage to exposed parts. 2. Avoid the use of operating handles or stems as rigging or lifting points. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 GENERAL A. See Drawings for specific valve locations. B. Refer to Part 3 for applications. C. Substitutions of valves with higher CWP classes or SWP ratings for same valve types are permitted when specified CWP ratings or SWP classes are not available. 2.02 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS A. Valve Pressure and Temperature Ratings:  No less than rating indicated; as required for system pressures and temperatures. B. Valve Sizes: Match upstream piping unless otherwise indicated. C. Valve Actuator Types: 1. Gear Actuator: Quarter-turn valves 8 NPS and larger. 2. Handwheel:  Valves other than quarter-turn types. 3. Hand Lever:  Quarter-turn valves 6 NPS and smaller except plug valves. 4. Wrench: Plug valves with square heads. University of Connecticut GENERAL-DUTY VALVES FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0523 - 4 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 5. Chainwheel:  Device for attachment to valve handwheel, stem, or other actuator, of size and with chain for mounting height, as indicated in the "Valve Installation" Article. D. Valves in Insulated Piping:  Provide 2 inch stem extensions and the following features: 1. Gate Valves: Rising stem. 2. Ball Valves:  Extended operating handle of non-thermal-conductive material, and protective sleeve that allows operation of valve without breaking the vapor seal or disturbing insulation. 3. Butterfly Valves: Extended neck. 4. Memory Stops: Fully adjustable after insulation is installed. E. Memory Stops: Fully adjustable after insulation is installed. F. Valve-End Connections: 1. Threaded End Valves:  ASME B1.20.1. 2. Flanges on Iron Valves:  ASME B16.1 for flanges on iron valves. 3. Pipe Flanges and Flanged Fittings 1/2 NPS through 24 NPS:  ASME B16.5. 4. Solder Joint Connections: ASME B16.18. 5. Grooved End Connections: AWWA C606. 6. Press End Connection: ASME B31. G. General ASME Compliance: 1. Ferrous Valve Dimensions and Design Criteria:  ASME B16.10 and ASME B16.34. 2. Power Piping Valves:  ASME B31.1. 3. Building Services Piping Valves:  ASME B31.9. H. Bronze Valves: 1. Fabricate from dezincification resistant material. 2. Copper alloys containing more than 15 percent zinc are not permitted. I. Valve Bypass and Drain Connections:  MSS SP-45. J. Source Limitations:  Obtain each valve type from a single manufacturer. 2.03 BRONZE GLOBE VALVES A. Class 125: CWP Rating: 200 psig:. 1. Comply with MSS SP-80, Type 1. 2. Body: Bronze; ASTM B62, with integral seat and screw in bonnet. 3. Ends: Threaded or solder joint. 4. Stem and Disc: Bronze or PTFE 5. Packing: Asbestos free. 6. Handwheel:  Malleable iron or bronze. 7. Manufacturers: a. Nibco Inc. b. Grinnell c. Crane Co. d. Milwaukee Valve Co. 2.04 IRON GLOBE VALVES A. Class 125: CWP Rating: 200 psig:, and Class 250:  CWP Rating:  500 psig:. 1. Comply with MSS SP-85, Type I. University of Connecticut GENERAL-DUTY VALVES FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0523 - 5 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2. Body: Gray iron; ASTM A126, with bolted bonnet. 3. Ends: Flanged. 4. Trim: Bronze. 5. Packing and Gasket:  Asbestos free. 6. Operator: Handwheel or chainwheel. 7. Manufacturers: a. Nibco Inc. b. Grinnell c. Crane Co. d. Milwaukee Valve Co. 2.05 BRASS BALL VALVES A. Two Piece, Full Port, Ball Valves with Stainless Steel Trim: 1. Comply with MSS SP-110. 2. SWP Rating: 150 psig. 3. CWP Rating:  600 psig. 4. Body: Forged brass. 5. Ends: Sweat, Press, Threaded. 6. Seats: PTFE 7. Stem: Stainless Steel. 8. Ball:  Chrome-plated brass or Stainless steel, vented 9. Manufacturers: a. Apollo b. Viega c. Watts B. Three Piece, Full Port with Stainless Steel Trim: 1. Comply with MSS SP-110. 2. SWP Rating: 150 psig. 3. CWP Rating:  600 psig. 4. Body: Forged brass. 5. Ends: Sweat, Press, Threaded. 6. Seats: PTFE 7. Stem: Stainless steel. 8. Ball:  Stainless steel, vented. 9. Manufacturers: a. Apollo b. Nibco c. Watts 2.06 BRONZE BALL VALVES A. Two Piece, Full Port, Bronze Ball Valves with Stainless-Steel Trim: 1. Comply with MSS SP-110. 2. SWP Rating: 150 psig. 3. CWP Rating:  600 psig. 4. Body: Bronze. 5. Ends: Sweat, Press, Threaded. 6. Seats: PTFE. University of Connecticut GENERAL-DUTY VALVES FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0523 - 6 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 7. Stem: Bronze, brass or stainless steel 8. Ball:  Chrome plated brass or stainless steel, vented 9. Manufacturers: a. Apollo b. Viega c. Watts B. Three Piece, Full Port with Stainless Steel Trim: 1. Comply with MSS SP-110. 2. SWP Rating: 150 psig. 3. CWP Rating:  600 psig. 4. Body: Bronze. 5. Ends: Sweat, Press, Threaded. 6. Seats: PTFE. 7. Stem: Stainless steel. 8. Ball:  Stainless steel, vented. 9. Manufacturers: a. Apollo b. Viega c. Watts 2.07 IRON, SINGLE FLANGE BUTTERFLY VALVES A. Lug type: Bi-directional dead end service without downstream flange. 1. Comply with MSS SP-67, Type I. 2. CWP Rating:  150 psig or 200 psig. 3. Body Material:  ASTM A126 cast iron, ASTM A536 ductile iron. 4. Stem: One or two-piece stainless steel. 5. Seat: NBR. 6. Disc: Coated ductile iron. 7. Manufacturers: a. Apollo b. Viega c. Watts 2.08 IRON, GROOVED-END BUTTERFLY VALVES A. CWP Rating: 175 psig, 300 psig:  8 NPS or smaller, 200 psig:  10 NPS or larger. 1. Comply with MSS SP-67, Type I. 2. Body: Coated ductile iron. 3. Stem: Stainless steel. 4. Disc: Coated ductile iron. 5. Disc Seal: EPDM. 6. Manufacturers: a. Apollo b. Viega c. Watts 2.09 HIGH-PERFORMANCE SINGLE FLANGE BUTTERFLY VALVES A. Lug type: Bi-directional dead end service without downstream flange. 1. Comply with MSS SP-68. University of Connecticut GENERAL-DUTY VALVES FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0523 - 7 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2. Class 150:  CWP Rating:  285 psig, Class 300:  CWP Rating: 720 psig. 3. Body: Provide carbon steel, cast iron, ductile Iron, stainless steel. 4. Seat: Metal or reinforced PTFE. 5. Offset stem:  Stainless steel. 6. Disc: 316 Stainless Steel 7. Manufacturers: a. Apollo b. Viega c. Watts 2.10 BRONZE LIFT CHECK VALVES A. Class 125: 1. Comply with MSS SP-80, Type 1, Metal Disc to Metal Seat, Type 2, Nonmetallic Disc to Metal Seat. 2. CWP Rating:  200 psig. 3. Design:  Vertical flow. 4. Body: Bronze. 5. Ends: Threaded. 6. Disc (Type 1): Bronze. 7. Disc (Type 2): NBR or PTFE. 8. Manufacturers: a. Watts b. Crane Co. c. Nibco, Inc. d. Milwaukee Valve Co. e. Mueller Steam Specialty 2.11 BRONZE SWING CHECK VALVES A. Class 125: CWP Rating: 200 psig, Class 150:  CWP Rating:  300 psig. 1. Comply with MSS SP-80, Type 3. 2. Body Design:  Horizontal flow. 3. Body Material:  Bronze, ASTM B62. 4. Ends: Threaded. 5. Disc: Bronze. 6. Manufacturers: a. Watts b. Crane Co. c. Nibco, Inc. d. Milwaukee Valve Co. 2.12 IRON SWING CHECK VALVES A. Class 125: CWP Rating: 200 psig with Metal Seats, Class 125:  CWP Rating: 150 psig with Metal Seats, Class 250:  CWP Rating:  500 psig  with Metal Seats, Class 250: CWP Rating: 300 psig with Metal Seats, Class 125:  CWP Rating:  200 psig  with Nonmetallic-to-Metal Seats. 1. Comply with MSS SP-71, Type I. 2. Design:  Clear or full waterway with flanged ends. 3. Body: Gray iron with bolted bonnet in accordance with ASTM A126. University of Connecticut GENERAL-DUTY VALVES FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0523 - 8 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 4. Trim: Bronze. 5. Disc Holder:  Bronze. 6. Disc: PTFE or TFE. 7. Gasket: Asbestos free. B. Manufacturers: a. Watts b. Crane Co. c. Nibco, Inc. d. Milwaukee Valve Co. 2.13 IRON, CENTER-GUIDED SILENT CHECK VALVES A. Class 125, Globe: 1. Comply with MSS SP-125. 2. 2-1/2 NPS to 12 NPS, CWP Rating: 200 psig. 3. 14 NPS to 24 NPS, CWP Rating: 150 psig. 4. Body Material: ASTM A126, gray iron. 5. Style: Spring loaded. 6. Ends: Flanged. 7. Metal Seat: Bronze. 8. Resilient Seat:  EPDM, NBR 9. Manufacturers: a. Watts b. Nibco, Inc c. Mueller Steam Specialty d. Watts B. Class 150, Globe: 1. Comply with MSS SP-125. 2. 2-1/2 NPS to 12 NPS, CWP Rating: 300 psig. 3. 14 NPS to 24 NPS, CWP Rating: 250 psig. 4. Body Material: ASTM A395/A395M or ASTM A536, ductile iron. 5. Style: Spring loaded. 6. Ends: Flanged. 7. Metal Seat: Bronze. 8. Resilient Seat:  EPDM, NBR 9. Manufacturers: a. Nibco, Inc. b. Mueller Steam Specialty c. Watts 2.14 BRONZE GATE VALVES A. Non-Rising Stem (NRS), Rising Stem (RS): 1. Comply with MSS SP-80, Type I. 2. Class125:  CWP Rating:  200 psig. 3. Class 150:  CWP Rating:  300 psig. 4. Body Material:  Bronze with integral seat and union-ring bonnet. 5. Ends: Threaded. 6. Stem: Bronze. University of Connecticut GENERAL-DUTY VALVES FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0523 - 9 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 7. Disc: Solid wedge; bronze. 8. Packing: Asbestos free. 9. Handwheel:  Malleable iron, bronze, or aluminum. 10. Manufacturers: a. Crane Co. b. Milwaukee Valve Co. c. Watts d. Nibco, Inc. 2.15 IRON GATE VALVES A. NRS, OS & Y 1. Comply with MSS SP-70, Type I. 2. Class 125:  2-1/2 NPS to 12 NPS, CWP Rating:  200 psig. 3. Class 125:  14 NPS to 24 NPS, CWP Rating:  150 psig. 4. Class 250:  2-1/2 NPS to 12 NPS, CWP Rating:  500 psig. 5. Class 250:  14 NPS to 24 NPS, CWP Rating:  300 psig. 6. Body Material: Gray iron with bolted bonnet. 7. Ends: Flanged. 8. Trim: Bronze. 9. Disc: Solid wedge. 10. Packing and Gasket:  Asbestos free. 11. Manufacturers: a. Crane Co. b. Milwaukee Valve Co. c. Watts d. Nibco, Inc. 2.16 ECCENTRIC PLUG VALVES A. Resilient Seating with Flanged Ends. 1. Comply with MSS SP-108. 2. CWP Rating:  175 psig minimum. 3. Body and Plug:  Gray or ductile iron. 4. Bearings:  Oil-impregnated bronze or Stainless Steel. 5. Stem-Seal Packing:  Asbestos free. 6. Plug, Resilient-Seating Material:  Approved for potable water service. 7. Manufacturers: a. Mueller b. Stockham c. DeZurik 2.17 CHAINWHEELS A. Description:  Valve actuation assembly with sprocket rim, brackets, and chain. 1. Brackets: Type, number, size, and fasteners required to mount actuator on valve. 2. Attachment: For connection to ball, butterfly, plug valve stems. 3. Sprocket Rim with Chain Guides:  Ductile iron include zinc coating. 4. Chain:  Hot-dip galvanized steel.  Sized to fit sprocket rim. 5. Manufacturers: a. Babbitt Steam Specialty Co. University of Connecticut GENERAL-DUTY VALVES FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0523 - 10 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 b. Roto Hammer Industries c. Trumbull Industries PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 EXAMINATION A. Discard all packing materials and verify that valve interior, including threads and flanges are completely clean without signs of damage or degradation that could result in leakage. B. Verify valve parts to be fully operational in all positions from closed to fully open. C. Confirm gasket material to be suitable for the service, to be of correct size, and without defects that could compromise effectiveness. D. Should valve is determined to be defective, replace with new valve. 3.02 ADJUSTING A. Adjust or replace valve packing after piping systems have been tested and put into service but before final adjusting and balancing.  Replace valves if persistent leaking occurs. 3.03 VALVE APPLICATION A. Valves on condenser water, chilled water, hot water and glycol services shall be as shown in the following tables.  If valve applications are not indicated, use the following: 1. Shutoff Service: Ball, butterfly, or gate valves. 2. Butterfly Valve Dead-End Service:  Single-flange (lug) type. 3. Throttling Service except Steam:  Globe or butterfly valves. 4. Pump-Discharge Check Valves: a. NPS 2 and Smaller: Spring wafer check valve with bronze disc. b. NPS 2-1/2 and Larger: Iron, center-guided, metal -seat check valves. B. If valves with specified SWP classes or CWP ratings are not available, the same types of valves with higher SWP classes or CWP ratings may be substituted. C. Select valves with end connections as indicated in the tables. For applications not listed in the tables select valves, except wafer types, with the following end connections: 1. For Copper Tubing, NPS 2 and Smaller:  Threaded ends. 2. For Steel Piping, NPS 2 and Smaller:  Threaded ends. 3. For Steel Piping, NPS 2-1/2 to NPS 4:  Flanged ends. 4. For Steel Piping, NPS 5 and Larger:  Flanged ends. University of Connecticut GENERAL-DUTY VALVES FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0523 - 11 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 University of Connecticut GENERAL-DUTY VALVES FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0523 - 12 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 University of Connecticut GENERAL-DUTY VALVES FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0523 - 13 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 University of Connecticut GENERAL-DUTY VALVES FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0523 - 14 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 University of Connecticut GENERAL-DUTY VALVES FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0523 - 15 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 GLYCOL AND HOT WATER SERVICE Maximum 250.F and 175 psig (."-12")/125 psig (14"-24")  Specialty  Application  Type  Size (inches)  Body/Seat, Body/Trim  Minimum Rating1,2  Ball Valve  Isolation (with locking handle) and Modulation  Full Port 3.pc.  1/2 - 2  Bronze/Teflon  400 psig WOG  Full Port 2 pc.  1/2 - 2  Bronze/Teflon  400 psig WOG  Gate Valve  Not Used  Globe Valve  ATC Modulation  Control Valve  1/2 - 2  Bronze/Metal  400 psig WOG  2-1/2 -6  Bronze/Metal  400 psig WOG  Butterfly Valve  Isolation and Modulation  General Service  2-1/2 -12  Ductile Iron/EPDM  200 psig CWP 200 psig bi-directional shutoff 200 psig dead end service  14 - 24  Ductile Iron/EPDM  150 psig CWP 150 psig bi-directional shutoff 150 psig dead end service  Plug Valve  Manual Balancing  Non-lubricated  3 -12  Steel/Iron  Class 125  Check Valve  Pumps  Silent  1/2 - 2  Bronze/Bronze  200 psig WOG  Silent Globe  2-1/2 -24  Iron/Bronze  Class 125  Piping  Y-Pattern Swing  1/2 - 2  Bronze/Bronze  200 psig WOG  2-1/2 -24  Iron/Bronze  Class 125  Strainer  Control Valves and Flow Meters  Y-Type  1/2 - 2  Bronze/Stainless (1/16" dia.)  200 psig WOG  2-1/2 -4  Iron/Stainless (1/16" dia.)  Class 125  5 - 24  Iron/Stainless (1/8" dia.)  Class 125  Pump Suction  In-Line Y-Type  1/2 - 2  Bronze/Stainless (1/16" dia.)  200 psig WOG  2-1/2 -4  Iron/Stainless (3/16" dia.)3  Class 125  5 -24  Iron/Stainless (." dia.)3  Class 125  Angle  2 - 12  Iron/Stainless  Class 125  Suction  (3/16" dia.)3  Diffuser  Start Up Strainer End  = 16 Mesh  Suction  Bronze  Pumps  These are minimum ratings for ASTM A126, Class B and ASTM B-61 and 62.  For higher pressures and temperatures, adjust these values to include static head plus 1.1 times pressure relief valve setting plus pump shutoff head pressure.  For actual maximum allowable valve and strainer ratings, refer to "Pressure-Temperature Ratings - Non Shock" tables and "Adjusted Pressure Ratings" for copper tube, soldered end valves [and strainers]. SWP=Steam Working Pressure CWP=Cold Water Working Pressure WSP=Working Steam Pressure WOG=Water, Oil or Gas Class=ANSI Standard Use 1/8 inch dia for plate heat exchanger application. Coordinate connection type with piping system.  GLYCOL AND HOT WATER SERVICE Maximum 225.F and 250 psig (."-24")  Specialty  Application  Type  Size (inches)  Body/Seat, Body/Trim  Minimum Rating1,2  Ball Valve  Isolation (with locking handle) and Modulation  Full Port 3.pc.  1/2 - 2  Bronze/Teflon  400 psig WOG  Full Port 2 pc.  1/2 - 2  Bronze/Teflon  400 psig WOG  Gate Valve  Not Used  Globe Valve  ATC Modulation  Control Valve  1/2 - 2  Bronze/Metal  400 psig WOG  2-1/2 -6  Bronze/Metal  600 psig WOG  Butterfly Valve  Isolation and Modulation  High Performance  2-1/2 -24  Carbon Steel/PTFE  285 psig CWP  Plug Valve  Manual Balancing  Non-lubricated  3 - 12  Steel/Iron  Class 250  Check Valve  Pumps  Silent  1 - 2  Bronze/Bronze  Class 250  Silent Globe  2-1/2 -24  Iron/Bronze  Class 250  Piping  Y-Pattern Swing  1 -2  Bronze/Bronze  Class 250  2-1/2 -24  Iron/Bronze  Class 250  Strainer  Control Valves and Flow Meters  Y-Type  1/2 - 2  Bronze/Stainless (20 mesh)  400 psi WOG  2-1/2 -4  Iron/Stainless (1/16" dia.)  Class 250  5 - 24  Iron/Stainless (1/8" dia.)  Class 250  Pump Suction  In-Line Y-Type  1/2 - 2  Bronze/Stainless (1/16" dia.)  400 psig WOG  2-1/2 -4  Iron/Stainless (3/16" dia.)3  Class 250  5 - 24  Iron/Stainless (." dia.)3  Class 250  Angle Suction Diffuser End Suction Pumps  2 - 12  Iron/Stainless (3/16" dia.)3 Start Up Strainer = 16 Mesh Bronze  Class 250  These are minimum ratings for ASTM A126, Class B and ASTM B-61 and 62.  For higher pressures and temperatures, adjust these values to include static head plus 1.1 times pressure relief valve setting plus pump shutoff head pressure.  For actual maximum allowable valve and  strainer ratings, refer to "Pressure-Temperature Ratings - Non Shock" tables and "Adjusted Pressure Ratings" for copper tube, soldered end valves [and strainers]. SWP=Steam Working Pressure CWP=Cold Water Working Pressure WSP=Working Steam Pressure WOG=Water, Oil or Gas Class=ANSI Standard Use 1/8 inch dia for plate heat exchanger application. Coordinate connection type with piping system. HOT WATER SERVICE Maximum 250.F and 400 psig (."-12")/250 psig (14"-24")  Specialty  Application  Type  Size (inches)  Body/Seat, Body/Trim  Minimum Rating1,2  Ball Valve  Isolation (with locking handle) and Modulation  Full Port 3-pc.  1/2 - 2  Bronze/Teflon  Do not use  Full Port 2 pc.  1/2 - 2  Bronze/Teflon  600 psig WOG  Gate Valve  Not Used  Globe Valve  ATC Modulation  Control Valve  1/2 = 2  Bronze/Metal  600 psig WOG  2-1/2 -6  Bronze/Metal  600 psig WOG  Butterfly Valve  Isolation and Modulation  High Performance  2-1/2 -24  Carbon Steel/PTFE  740 psig CWP  Plug Valve  Manual Balancing  Non-lubricated  3 - 12  Steel/Iron  Class 250  Check Valve  Pumps  Silent  1 - 2  Bronze/Bronze  Class 250  Silent Globe  2-1/2 -24  Iron/Bronze  Class 250  Piping  Y-Pattern Swing  1 - 2  Bronze/Bronze  Class 250  2-1/2 -24  Iron/Bronze  Class 250  Strainer  Control Valves and Flow Meters  Y-Type  1/2 - 2  Bronze/Stainless (20 mesh)  600 psig WOG  2-1/2 - Iron/Stainless  Class 250  University of Connecticut GENERAL-DUTY VALVES FOR HVAC PIPING 23 0523 - 16 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 4  (1/16" dia.)  5 - 24  Iron/Stainless (1/8" dia.)  Class 250  Pump Suction  In-Line Y-Type  1/2 - 2  Bronze/Stainless (1/16" dia.)  600 psig WOG  2-1/2 -4  Iron/Stainless (3/16" dia.)3  Class 250  5 - 24  Iron/Stainless (." dia.)3  Class 250  Angle Suction Diffuser End Suction Pumps  2 -12  Iron/Stainless (3/16" dia.)3 Start Up Strainer = 16 Mesh Bronze  Class 250  These are minimum ratings for ASTM A126, Class B and ASTM B-61 and 62.  For higher pressures and temperatures, adjust these values to include static head plus 1.1 times pressure relief valve setting plus pump shutoff head pressure.  For actual maximum allowable valve and strainer ratings, refer to "Pressure-Temperature Ratings - Non Shock" tables and "Adjusted Pressure Ratings" for copper tube, soldered end valves [and strainers]. SWP=Steam Working Pressure CWP=Cold Water Working Pressure WSP=Working Steam Pressure WOG=Water, Oil or Gas Class=ANSI Standard Use 1/8 inch dia for plate heat exchanger application. Coordinate connection type with piping system.  3.04 INSTALLATION A. Provide unions or flanges with valves to facilitate equipment removal and maintenance while maintaining system operation and full accessibility for servicing. B. Provide separate valve support as required and locate valve with stem at or above center of piping, maintaining unimpeded stem movement. C. Where valve support members are welded to structural building framing, scrape, brush clean, and apply one coat of zinc rich primer to welds. D. Install check valves where necessary to maintain direction of flow as follows: E. Lift Check: Install with stem plumb and vertical. F. Swing Check:  Install horizontal maintaining hinge pin level. G. Orient plate-type, center-guided into horizontal or vertical position, between flanges. H. Provide chainwheels on operators for valves 4 NPS and larger where located 96 NPS or more above finished floor, terminating 60 NPS above finished floor. END OF SECTION University of Connecticut HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC 23 0529 -1 PIPING, DUCTWORK AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 SECTION 23 0529 -HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC PIPING, DUCTWORK AND EQUIPMENT PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Pipe hangers and supports. B. Duct hangers and supports C. Hanger rods. D. Inserts. E. Flashing. F. Formed steel channel. G. Equipment bases and supports. 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 1 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.03 REFERENCES A. American Society of Mechanical Engineers: 1. ASME B31.1 -Power Piping. 2. ASME B31.5 -Refrigeration Piping. 3. ASME B31.9 -Building Services Piping. B. ASTM International: 1. ASTM E119 -Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Building Construction and Materials. 2. ASTM E814 -Standard Test Method for Fire Tests of Through Penetration Fire Stops. 3. ASTM F708 -Standard Practice for Design and Installation of Rigid Pipe Hangers. 4. ASTM E1966 -Standard Test Method for Fire-Resistive Joint Systems. C. American Welding Society: 1. AWS D1.1 -Structural Welding Code -Steel. D. FM Global: 1. FM -Approval Guide, A Guide to Equipment, Materials & Services Approved By Factory Mutual Research For Property Conservation. E. Manufacturers Standardization Society of the Valve and Fittings Industry: 1. MSS SP 58 -Pipe Hangers and Supports -Materials, Design and Manufacturer. 2. MSS SP 69 -Pipe Hangers and Supports -Selection and Application. 3. MSS SP 89 -Pipe Hangers and Supports -Fabrication and Installation Practices. F. Intertek Testing Services (Warnock Hersey Listed): 1. WH -Certification Listings. University of Connecticut HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC 23 0529 -2 PIPING, DUCTWORK AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1.04 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. Contractor shall design supports for multiple pipes and/or ducts, including pipe and duct stands, capable of supporting combined weight of supported systems, system contents, and fluid. B. Contractor shall design equipment supports capable of supporting combined operating weight of supported equipment and connected systems and components. 1.05 SUBMITTALS A. Shop Drawings: Indicate system layout with location including critical dimensions, sizes, and pipe hanger and support locations and detail of trapeze hangers. B. Product Data: 1. Hangers and Supports: Submit manufacturers catalog data including load capacity. C. Design Data: Indicate load carrying capacity of trapeze, multiple pipe, and riser support hangers. Indicate calculations used to determine load carrying capacity of trapeze, multiple pipe, and riser support hangers. D. Welding certificates. E. Manufacturer's Installation Instructions: 1. Hangers and Supports: Submit special procedures and assembly of components. 1.06 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Welding: Qualify procedures and personnel according to AWS D1.1, "Structural Welding Code--Steel." and AWS D1.3, "Structural Welding Code--Sheet Steel." B. Welding: Qualify procedures and personnel according to the following: 1. AWS D1.1, "Structural Welding Code--Steel." 2. AWS D1.2, "Structural Welding Code--Aluminum." 3. AWS D1.3, "Structural Welding Code--Sheet Steel." 1.07 QUALIFICATIONS A. Manufacturer: Company specializing in manufacturing Products specified in this section with minimum three years documented experience. B. Installer: Company specializing in performing Work of this section with minimum 3 years documented experience. 1.08 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Accept materials on site in original factory packaging, labeled with manufacturer's identification. B. Protect from weather and construction traffic, dirt, water, chemical, and damage, by storing in original packaging. 1.09 FIELD MEASUREMENTS A. Verify field measurements prior to fabrication. 1.10 WARRANTY A. Furnish five year manufacturer warranty for pipe hangers and supports. PART 2 PRODUCTS University of Connecticut HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC 23 0529 -3 PIPING, DUCTWORK AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2.01 PIPE HANGERS AND SUPPORTS A. Description: MSS SP-58, Types 1 through 58, factory-fabricated components. Refer to Part 3 "Hanger and Support Applications" Article for where to use specific hanger and support types. B. Available Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, manufacturers offering products that may be incorporated into the Work include, but are not limited to the following:: 1. B-Line Systems, Inc. 2. National Pipe Hanger Corporation 3. Empire Industries, Inc. 4. Globe Pipe Hanger Products Inc. 5. Michigan Hanger Co. 6. PHD Manufacturing, Inc. C. Galvanized, Metallic Coatings: Pre-galvanized or hot dipped. D. Nonmetallic Coatings: Plastic coating, jacket, or liner. E. Padded Hangers: Hanger with fiberglass or other pipe insulation pad or cushion for support of bearing surface of piping. 2.02 DUCT HANGERS AND SUPPORTS A. Shall be in accordance with SMACNA's 2005 "HVAC Duct Construction Standards .Metal and Flexible" except non-engineered wire hangers are not permitted. Engineered cable support systems may be used if they meet SMACNA, Ductmate or approved equal. B. Hanger Rods for Noncorrosive Environments: Cadmium-plated steel rods and nuts. C. Hanger Rods for Corrosive Environments: Electrogalvanized, all-thread rods or galvanized rods with threads painted with zinc-chromate primer after installation. D. Strap and Rod Sizes: Comply with SMACNA's 2005 "HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible," Table 5-1 (Table 5-1M), "Rectangular Duct Hangers Minimum Size," and Table 5-2, "Minimum Hanger Sizes for Round Duct. E. Steel Cables for Galvanized-Steel Ducts: Galvanized steel complying with ASTM A 603. F. Steel Cables for Stainless-Steel Ducts: Stainless steel complying with ASTM A 492. G. Steel Cable End Connections: Cadmium-plated steel assemblies with brackets, swivel, and bolts designed for duct hanger service; with an automatic-locking and clamping device. H. Duct Attachments: Sheet metal screws, blind rivets, or self-tapping metal screws; compatible with duct materials. I. Trapeze and Riser Supports: 1. Supports for Galvanized-Steel Ducts: Galvanized-steel shapes and plates. 2. Supports for Stainless-Steel Ducts: Stainless-steel shapes and plates. 3. Supports for Aluminum Ducts: Aluminum or galvanized steel coated with zinc chromate University of Connecticut HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC 23 0529 -4 PIPING, DUCTWORK AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2.03 ACCESSORIES A. Hanger Rods: Mild steel threaded both ends, threaded on one end, or continuous threaded. 2.04 THERMAL SHIELD INSERTS A. Description: 100-psig-minimum, compressive-strength insulation insert encased in sheet metal shield. Insert shall be capable of supporting weight of pipe, insulations and fluid without crushing. B. Manufacturers: 1. Carpenter & Paterson, Inc. 2. ERICO/Michigan Hanger Co. 3. PHS Industries, Inc. 4. Pipe Shields, Inc. 5. Rilco Manufacturing Company, Inc. 6. Value Engineered Products, Inc. C. Insulation-Insert Material for Cold Piping: Water-repellent treated, ASTM C 533, Type I calcium silicate or ASTM C 552, Type II cellular glass with vapor barrier. D. Insulation-Insert Material for Hot Piping: Water-repellent treated, ASTM C 533, Type I calcium silicate or ASTM C 552, Type II cellular glass. E. For Trapeze or Clamped Systems: Insert and shield shall cover entire circumference of pipe. F. For Clevis or Band Hangers: Insert and shield shall cover lower 180 degrees of pipe. G. Insert Length: Extend 2 inches beyond sheet metal shield for piping operating below ambient air temperature. 2.05 FASTENER SYSTEMS A. Mechanical-Expansion Anchors: Insert-wedge-type zinc-coated or stainless steel, for use in hardened portland cement concrete with pull-out, tension, and shear capacities appropriate for supported loads and building materials where used. B. Manufacturers: 1. B-Line Systems, Inc.; a division of Cooper Industries. 2. Empire Industries, Inc. 3. Hilti, Inc. 4. ITW Ramset/Red Head. 5. MKT Fastening, LLC. 6. Powers Fasteners. 2.06 MISCELLANEOUS MATERIALS A. Hanger Rods: Mild steel threaded both ends, threaded on one end, or continuous threaded. B. Pipe Stands, General: Shop or field-fabricated assemblies made of manufactured corrosion-resistant components to support roof-mounted piping. C. Equipment Supports: Welded, shop-or field-fabricated equipment support made from structural-steel shapes. University of Connecticut HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC 23 0529 -5 PIPING, DUCTWORK AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 D. Structural Steel: ASTM A 36/A 36M, steel plates, shapes, and bars; black and galvanized. E. Grout: ASTM C 1107, factory-mixed and -packaged, dry, hydraulic-cement, nonshrink and nonmetallic grout; suitable for interior and exterior applications. 1. Properties: Nonstaining, noncorrosive, and nongaseous. 2. Design Mix: 5000-psi, 28-day compressive strength. 2.07 FORMED STEEL CHANNEL A. Manufacturers: 1. Allied Tube & Conduit Corp. 2. B-Line Systems 3. Midland Ross Corporation, Electrical Products Division 4. Unistrut Corp. B. Product Description: Galvanized 12 gage thick steel. With holes 1-1/2 inches on center. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 PIPE HANGER AND SUPPORT APPLICATIONS A. Specific hanger and support requirements are specified in other Division 23 Sections specifying piping systems and equipment. B. Comply with MSS SP-69 for pipe hanger selections and applications that are not specified in piping system Sections. C. Use hangers and supports with galvanized, metallic coatings for piping and equipment that will not have field-applied finish. D. Use nonmetallic coatings on attachments for electrolytic protection where attachments are in direct contact with copper tubing. E. Use padded hangers for piping that is subject to scratching. F. Horizontal-Piping Hangers and Supports: Unless otherwise indicated and except as specified in piping system specific sections, install the following types: 1. MSS Type 1 -Adjustable, Steel Clevis Hangers: For suspension of non-insulated or insulated stationary pipes, 2 inch to 30 inch size. 2. MSS Type 2 -Yoke-Type Pipe Clamps: For suspension of 120 to 450 deg F pipes, 4 inch to 16 inch size, requiring up to 4 inches of insulation. 3. MSS Type 3 -Carbon-or Alloy-Steel, Double-Bolt Pipe Clamps: For suspension of pipes, 3/4 inch to 24 inch size, requiring clamp flexibility and up to 4 inches of insulation. 4. MSS Type 4 -Steel Pipe Clamps: For suspension of cold and hot pipes, 1/2 inch to 24 inch size, if little or no insulation is required. 5. MSS Type 5 -Pipe Hangers: For suspension of pipes, 1/2 inch to 4 inch size, to allow off-center closure for hanger installation before pipe erection. 6. MSS Type 12 -Extension Hinged or 2-Bolt Split Pipe Clamps: For suspension of non-insulated stationary pipes, 3/8 inch to 3 inch size. 7. MSS Type 24 -U-Bolts: For support of heavy pipes, 1/2 inch to 30 inch. 8. MSS Type 26 -Clips: For support of insulated pipes not subject to expansion or contraction. University of Connecticut HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC 23 0529 -6 PIPING, DUCTWORK AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 9. MSS Type 36 -Pipe Saddle Supports: For support of pipes, 4 inch to 36 inch size, with steel pipe base stanchion support and cast-iron floor flange. 10. MSS Type 37 -Pipe Stanchion Saddles: For support of pipes, 4 inch to 36 inch size, with steel pipe base stanchion support and cast-iron floor flange and with U-bolt to retain pipe. 11. MSS Type 38 -Adjustable, Pipe Saddle Supports: For stanchion-type support for pipes, 2-1/2 inch to 36 inch size, if vertical adjustment is required, with steel pipe base stanchion support and cast-iron floor flange. 12. MSS Type 41 -Single Pipe Rolls: For suspension of pipes, 1 inch to 30 inch size, from 2 rods if longitudinal movement caused by expansion and contraction might occur. 13. MSS Type 43 -Adjustable Roller Hangers: For suspension of pipes, 2-1/2 inch to 20 inch size, from single rod if horizontal movement caused by expansion and contraction might occur. 14. MSS Type 44 -Complete Pipe Rolls: For support of pipes, 2 inch to 42 inch size, if longitudinal movement caused by expansion and contraction might occur but vertical adjustment is not necessary. 15. MSS Type 45 -Pipe Roll and Plate Units: For support of pipes, 2 inch to 24 inch, if small horizontal movement caused by expansion and contraction might occur and vertical adjustment is not necessary. 16. MSS Type 46 -Adjustable Pipe Roll and Base Units: For support of pipes, 2 inch to 30 inch size, if vertical and lateral adjustment during installation might be required in addition to expansion and contraction. G. Vertical-Piping Clamps: Unless otherwise indicated and except as specified in piping system Sections, install the following types: 1. MSS Type 8 -Extension Pipe or Riser Clamps: For support of pipe risers, . inch to 20 inch size. 2. MSS Type 42 -Carbon-or Alloy-Steel Riser Clamps: For support of pipe risers, 3/4 inch to 20 inch size, if longer ends are required for riser clamps. H. Hanger-Rod Attachments: Unless otherwise indicated and except as specified in piping system Sections, install the following types: 1. MSS Type 13 -Steel Turnbuckles: For adjustment up to 6 inches for heavy loads. 2. MSS Type 14 -Steel Clevises: For 120 to 450 deg F piping installations. 3. MSS Type 15 -Swivel Turnbuckles: For use with MSS Type 11, split pipe rings. 4. MSS Type 16 -Malleable-Iron Sockets: For attaching hanger rods to various types of building attachments. 5. MSS Type 17 -Steel Weldless Eye Nuts: For 120 to 450 deg F piping installations. I. Building Attachments: Unless otherwise indicated and except as specified in piping system Sections, install the following types: 1. MSS Type 18 -Steel or Malleable Concrete Inserts: For upper attachment to suspend pipe hangers from concrete ceiling. 2. MSS Type 19 -Top-Beam C-Clamps: For use under roof installations with bar-joist construction to attach to top flange of structural shape. University of Connecticut HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC 23 0529 -7 PIPING, DUCTWORK AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 3. MSS Type 20 -Side-Beam or Channel Clamps: For attaching to bottom flange of beams, channels, or angles. 4. MSS Type 21 -Center-Beam Clamps: For attaching to center of bottom flange of beams. 5. MSS Type 22 -Welded Beam Attachments: For attaching to bottom of beams if loads are considerable and rod sizes are large. 6. MSS Type 23 -C-Clamps: For structural shapes. 7. MSS Type 25 -Top-Beam Clamps: For top of beams if hanger rod is required tangent to flange edge. 8. MSS Type 27 -Side-Beam Clamps: For bottom of steel I-beams. 9. MSS Type 28 -Steel-Beam Clamps with Eye Nuts: For attaching to bottom of steel I-beams for heavy loads. 10. MSS Type 29 -Linked-Steel Clamps with Eye Nuts: For attaching to bottom of steel I-beams for heavy loads, with link extensions. 11. MSS Type 30 -Malleable Beam Clamps with Extension Pieces: For attaching to structural steel. 12. Welded-Steel Brackets: For support of pipes from below, or for suspending from above by using clip and rod. Use one of the following for indicated loads: a. Light (MSS Type 31): 750 lb. b. Medium (MSS Type 32): 1500 lb. c. Heavy (MSS Type 33): 3000 lb. 13. MSS Type 34 -Side-Beam Brackets: For sides of steel or wooden beams. 14. MSS Type 57 -Plate Lugs: For attaching to steel beams if flexibility at beam is required. 15. MSS Type 58 -Horizontal Travelers: For supporting piping systems subject to linear horizontal movement where headroom is limited. J. Saddles and Shields: Unless otherwise indicated and except as specified in piping system Sections, install the following types: 1. MSS Type 39 -Steel Pipe-Covering Protection Saddles: To fill interior voids with insulation that matches adjoining insulation. 2. MSS Type 40 -Protection Shields: Of length recommended in writing by manufacturer to prevent crushing insulation. 3. Thermal-Hanger Shield Inserts: For supporting insulated pipe. K. Spring Hangers and Supports: Unless otherwise indicated and except as specified in piping system Sections, install the following types: 1. MSS Type 47 -Restraint-Control Devices: Where indicated to control piping movement. 2. MSS Type 48 -Spring Cushions: For light loads if vertical movement does not exceed 1-1/4 inches. 3. MSS Type 49 -Spring-Cushion Roll Hangers: For equipping Type 41 roll hanger with springs. 4. MSS Type 50 -Spring Sway Braces: To retard sway, shock, vibration, or thermal expansion in piping systems. University of Connecticut HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC 23 0529 -8 PIPING, DUCTWORK AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 5. MSS Type 51 -Variable-Spring Hangers: Preset to indicated load and limit variability factor to 25 percent to absorb expansion and contraction of piping system from hanger. 6. MSS Type 52 -Variable-Spring Base Supports: Preset to indicated load and limit variability factor to 25 percent to absorb expansion and contraction of piping system from base support. 7. MSS Type 53 -Variable-Spring Trapeze Hangers: Preset to indicated load and limit variability factor to 25 percent to absorb expansion and contraction of piping system from trapeze support. 8. Constant Supports: For critical piping stress and if necessary to avoid transfer of stress from one support to another support, critical terminal, or connected equipment. Include auxiliary stops for erection, hydrostatic test, and load-adjustment capability. These supports include the following types: a. Horizontal (MSS Type 54): Mounted horizontally. b. Vertical (MSS Type 55): Mounted vertically. c. Trapeze (MSS Type 56): Two vertical-type supports and one trapeze member. L. Comply with MSS SP-69 for trapeze pipe hanger selections and applications that are not specified in piping system Sections. M. Comply with MFMA-102 for metal framing system selections and applications that are not specified in piping system Sections. 3.02 PIPE HANGER AND SUPPORT INSTALLATION A. Steel Pipe Hanger Installation: Comply with MSS SP-69 and MSS SP-89. Install hangers, supports, clamps, and attachments as required to properly support piping from building structure. B. Trapeze Pipe Hanger Installation: Comply with MSS SP-69 and MSS SP-89. Arrange for grouping of parallel runs of horizontal piping and support together on field-fabricated trapeze pipe hangers. 1. Pipes of Various Sizes: Support together and space trapezes for smallest pipe size or install intermediate supports for smaller diameter pipes as specified above for individual pipe hangers. 2. Field fabricate from ASTM A 36/A 36M, steel shapes selected for loads being supported. Weld steel according to AWS D1.1. C. Metal Framing System for Multiple Hangers: Arrange for grouping of parallel runs of piping and support together on field-assembled metal framing systems. D. Thermal-Hanger Shield Installation: Install in pipe hanger or shield for insulated piping. E. Fastener System Installation: 1. Install mechanical-expansion anchors in concrete after concrete is placed and completely cured. Install fasteners according to manufacturer's written instructions. F. Pipe Stand Installation: 1. Pipe Stand Types except Curb-Mounting Type: Assemble components and mount on smooth roof surface. Do not penetrate roof membrane. University of Connecticut HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC 23 0529 -9 PIPING, DUCTWORK AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2. Curb-Mounting-Type Pipe Stands: Assemble components or fabricate pipe stand and mount on permanent, stationary roof curb. Refer to Division 07 Section "Roof Accessories" for curbs. 3. Floor Support: concrete pier or steel support. G. Install hangers and supports complete with necessary inserts, bolts, rods, nuts, washers, and other accessories. H. Install hangers and supports to allow controlled thermal and seismic movement of piping systems, to permit freedom of movement between pipe anchors, and to facilitate action of expansion joints, expansion loops, expansion bends, and similar units. I. Install lateral bracing with pipe hangers and supports to prevent swaying. J. Install building attachments within concrete slabs or attach to structural steel. Install additional attachments at concentrated loads, including valves, flanges, and strainers, NPS 2-1/2 and larger and at changes in direction of piping. Install concrete inserts before concrete is placed; fasten inserts to forms and install reinforcing bars through openings at top of inserts. K. Load Distribution: Install hangers and supports so piping live and dead loads and stresses from movement will not be transmitted to connected equipment. L. Pipe Slopes: Install hangers and supports to provide indicated pipe slopes and so maximum pipe deflections allowed by ASME B31.1 (for power piping) and ASME B31.9 (for building services piping) are not exceeded. M. Insulated Piping: Comply with the following: 1. Attach clamps and spacers to piping. a. Piping Operating above Ambient Air Temperature: Clamp may project through insulation. b. Piping Operating below Ambient Air Temperature: Use thermal-hanger shield insert with clamp sized to match OD of insert. c. Do not exceed pipe stress limits according to ASME B31.1 for power piping and ASME B31.9 for building services piping. 2. Install MSS SP-58, Type 39, protection saddles if insulation without vapor barrier is indicated. Fill interior voids with insulation that matches adjoining insulation. a. Option: Thermal-hanger shield inserts may be used. Include steel weight-distribution plate for pipe NPS 4 and larger if pipe is installed on rollers. 3. Install MSS SP-58, Type 40, protective shields on cold piping with vapor barrier. Shields shall span an arc of 180 degrees. a. Option: Thermal-hanger shield inserts may be used. Include steel weight-distribution plate for pipe NPS 4 and larger if pipe is installed on rollers. 4. Shield Dimensions for Pipe: Not less than the following: a. NPS 1/4 to NPS 3-1/2: 12 inches long and 0.048 inch thick. b. NPS 4: 12 inches long and 0.06 inch thick. c. NPS 5 and NPS 6: 18 inches long and 0.06 inch thick. d. NPS 8 to NPS 14: 24 inches long and 0.075 inch thick. e. NPS 16 to NPS 24: 24 inches long and 0.105 inch thick. 5. Pipes NPS 8 and Larger: Include wood inserts. 6. Insert Material: Length at least as long as protective shield. University of Connecticut HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC 23 0529 -10 PIPING, DUCTWORK AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 7. Thermal-Hanger Shields: Install with insulation same thickness as piping insulation. N. Design hangers for pipe movement without disengagement of supported pipe. O. Provide clearance in hangers and from structure and other equipment for installation of insulation. Refer to Section 23 07 00 Provide supplemental angles, channels and formed steel supports to support piping, ductwork, equipment, etc. from building’s structure. Piping, ductwork, equipment, etc. shall not be supported from the roof deck. 3.03 DUCT HANGER AND SUPPORT INSTALLATION A. Comply with SMACNA's 2005 "HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible," Chapter 5, "Hangers and Supports." B. Building Attachments: Concrete inserts, powder-actuated fasteners, or structural-steel fasteners appropriate for construction materials to which hangers are being attached. 1. Where practical, install concrete inserts before placing concrete. 2. Install powder-actuated concrete fasteners after concrete is placed and completely cured. 3. Use powder-actuated concrete fasteners for standard-weight aggregate concretes or for slabs more than 4 inches thick. 4. Do not use powder-actuated concrete fasteners for lightweight-aggregate concretes or for slabs less than 4 inches thick. 5. Do not use powder-actuated concrete fasteners for seismic restraints. C. Hanger Spacing: Comply with SMACNA's 2005 "HVAC Duct Construction Standards .Metal and Flexible," Table 5-1 (Table 5-1M), "Rectangular Duct Hangers Minimum Size," and Table 5-2, "Minimum Hanger Sizes for Round Duct," for maximum hanger spacing; install hangers and supports within 24 inches of each elbow and within 48 inches of each branch intersection. D. Hangers Exposed to View: Threaded rod and angle or channel supports. 3.04 EQUIPMENT BASES AND SUPPORTS A. Provide housekeeping pads of concrete, minimum 4 inches thick (see structural drawings for size) and extending 6 inches beyond supported equipment. Refer to Division 03. B. Using templates furnished with equipment, install anchor bolts, and accessories for mounting and anchoring equipment. C. Construct supports to suspend equipment from structure overhead or to support equipment above floor. Fabricate supports from welded-structural steel shapes. Brace and fasten with flanges bolted to structure. D. Provide rigid anchors for pipes after vibration isolation components are installed. Refer to Section 23 05 48. 3.05 METAL FABRICATIONS A. Cut, drill, and fit miscellaneous metal fabrications for trapeze pipe hangers and equipment supports. B. Fit exposed connections together to form hairline joints. Field weld connections that cannot be shop welded because of shipping size limitations. University of Connecticut HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC 23 0529 -11 PIPING, DUCTWORK AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 C. Field Welding: Comply with AWS D1.1 procedures for shielded metal arc welding, appearance and quality of welds, and methods used in correcting welding work, and with the following: 1. Use materials and methods that minimize distortion and develop strength and corrosion resistance of base metals. 2. Obtain fusion without undercut or overlap. 3. Remove welding flux immediately. 4. Finish welds at exposed connections so no roughness shows after finishing and contours of welded surfaces match adjacent contours. 3.06 ADJUSTING A. Hanger Adjustments: Adjust hangers to distribute loads equally on attachments and to achieve indicated slope of pipe. B. Trim excess length of continuous-thread hanger and support rods to 1-1/2 inches. 3.07 SCHEDULES A. Copper and Steel Pipe Hanger Spacing: University of Connecticut HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR HVAC 23 0529 -12 PIPE SIZE Inches  COPPER TUBING MAXIMUM HANGER SPACING Feet  STEEL PIPE MAXIMUM HANGER SPACING Feet  COPPER TUBING HANGER ROD DIAMETER Inches  STEEL PIPE HANGER ROD DIAMETER Inches  1/2  5  7  3/8  3/8  3/4  5  7  3/8  3/8  1  6  7  3/8  3/8  1-1/4  7  7  3/8  3/8  1-1/2  8  9  3/8  3/8  2  8  10  3/8  3/8  2-1/2 (Note 2)  9  11  1/2  1/2  3  10  12  1/2  1/2  4  12  14  1/2  5/8  5  13  16  1/2  5/8  6  14  17  5/8  3/4  8  16  19  3/4  3/4  10  18  22  3/4  7/8  12  19  23  3/4  7/8  14  22  25  7/8  1  PIPING, DUCTWORK AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 16  23  27  7/8  1  18  25  28  1  1  20  27  30  1  1-1/4  24  28  32  1-1/4  1-1/4  3.08 PLASTIC AND DUCTILE IRON PIPE HANGER SPACING: PIPE MATERIAL  MAXIMUM HANGER SPACING Feet  HANGER ROD DIAMETER Inches  ABS (All sizes)  4  3/8  FRP (All Sizes)  4  3/8  Ductile Iron (Note 2)  PVC (All Sizes)  4  3/8  A. Note 1: Refer to manufacturer’s recommendations for grooved end piping systems. B. Note 2: 20 feet maximum spacing, minimum of one hanger for each pipe section close to joint behind bell. Provide hanger at each change of direction and each branch connection. For pipe sizes 6 inches and smaller, subjected to loadings other than weight of pipe and contents, limit span to maximum spacing for water service steel pipe. END OF SECTION University of Connecticut VIBRATION AND SEISMIC CONTROLS 23 0548 - 1 FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 SECTION 23 0548 VIBRATION AND SEISMIC CONTROLS FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Equipment support bases. B. Vibration isolators, non-seismic type C. Vibration isolators, seismic type D. Seismic snubber assemblies. E. Seismic restraints for suspended components and equipment 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this section. B. Division 03 - Concrete. C. Section 23 0400 – General Conditions for Mechanical Trades. D. Section 23 05 16 – Expansion Fittings and Loops for HVAC Pipe 1.03 REFERENCE STANDARDS (FOLLOW THE MOST CURRENTLY ADOPTED AMENDED VERSION) A. Air Movement and Control Association International, Inc.: 1. AMCA 300 - Reverberant Room Method for Sound Testing of Fans. B. American National Standards Institute: 1. ANSI S1.4 - Sound Level Meters. 2. ANSI S1.8 - Reference Quantities for Acoustical Levels. 3. ANSI S1.13 - Methods for the Measurement of Sound Pressure Levels in Air. 4. ANSI S12.36 - Survey Methods for the Determination of Sound Power Levels of Noise Sources. C. Air-Conditioning and Refrigeration Institute: 1. ARI 575 - Method of Measuring Machinery Sound within Equipment Space. D. American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air Conditioning: 1. ASHRAE 68 - Laboratory Method of Testing In-Duct Sound Power Measurement Procedure for Fans. 2. ASHRAE Handbook - HVAC Applications. E. ASTM International: 1. ASTM E90 - Standard Test Method for Laboratory Measurement of Airborne Sound Transmission Loss of Building Partitions and Elements. 2. ASTM E477 - Standard Test Method for Measuring Acoustical and Airflow Performance of Duct Liner Materials and Prefabricated Silencers. 3. ASTM E596 - Standard Test Method for Laboratory Measurement of the Noise Reduction of Sound-Isolating Enclosures. F. Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors’ National Association: University of Connecticut VIBRATION AND SEISMIC CONTROLS 23 0548 - 2 FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1. SMACNA - HVAC Duct Construction Standard - Metal and Flexible. 2. SMACNA - Seismic Restraint Manual Guidelines for Mechanical Systems G. American Society of Civil Engineers 1. ASCE - Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures. H. FEMA 1. FEMA 412 - Installing Seismic Restraints for Mechanical Equipment. 2. FEMA 413 - Installing Seismic Restraints for Electrical Equipment. 3. FEMA 414 - Installing Seismic Restraints for Duct and Pipe. 4. FEMA E-74 - Reducing the Risks of Nonstructural Earthquake Damage. I. IAS AC172 - Accreditation Criteria for Fabricator Inspection Programs for Structural Steel; International Accreditation Service, Inc. 1.04 INTENT A. All mechanical equipment, piping and ductwork as noted on the equipment schedule or in the specification shall be mounted on or suspended from vibration isolators to prevent the transmission of vibration and mechanically transmitted sound to the building structure. Vibration isolators shall be selected in accordance with the weight distribution so as to produce reasonably uniform deflections. B. All isolators and isolation materials shall be of the same manufacturer and shall be certified by the manufacturer. C. It is the intent of the seismic portion of this specification to keep all mechanical and electrical building system components in place during a seismic event. D. All such systems must be installed in strict accordance with seismic codes, component manufacturer's recommendations and building construction standards. Whenever a conflict occurs between the manufacturer's recommendations or construction standards, the most stringent shall apply. E. This specification is considered to be minimum requirements for seismic consideration and is not intended as a substitute for legislated, more stringent, national, state or local construction requirements (i.e. California Title 24, California OSHPD, Canadian Building Codes, or other requirements). F. Any variance or non-compliance with these specification requirements shall be corrected by the contractor in an approved manner. 1.05 SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: Submit schedule of vibration isolator type with location and load on each. Submit catalog information indicating, materials, dimensional data, pressure losses, and acoustical performance for standard sound attenuation products.Shop Drawings: 1. Provide schedule of vibration isolator type with location and load on each. 2. Fully dimensioned fabrication drawings and installation details for vibration isolation bases, member sizes, attachments to isolators, and supported equipment. 3. Include auxiliary motor slide bases and rails, base weights, inertia bases, concrete weights, equipment static loads, support points, vibration isolators, and University of Connecticut VIBRATION AND SEISMIC CONTROLS 23 0548 - 3 FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 detailed layout of isolator location and orientation with static and dynamic load on each isolator. 4. Include selections from prescriptive design tables that indicate compliance with the applicable building code and the vibration isolator manufacturer's requirements. 5. Clearly indicate the load and capacity assumptions selected. Include copies of any calculations. B. Seismic Certification and Analysis: 1. Include the calculations that indicate compliance with the applicable building code for seismic controls and the vibration isolator manufacturer's requirements. 2. Include the seal of the Professional Structural Engineer registered where the Project is located, on the drawings and calculations which at a minimum include the following: a. Seismic Restraint Details:  Detailed drawings of seismic restraints and snubbers including anchorage details that indicate quantity, diameter, and depth of penetration, edge distance, and spacing of anchors. b. Equipment Seismic Qualification Certification:  Certification by the manufacturer or responsible party that each piece of equipment provided will withstand seismic force levels as specified in the applicable building code for seismic controls. C. Basis for Certification:  Indicate whether the withstand certification is based on actual testing of assembled components, on calculations, or on historic data. D. Indicate equipment to be sufficiently durable to resist design forces and or remain functional after the seismic event. a. Dimensioned outline drawings of equipment identifying center of gravity, locations, and provisions for mounting and anchorage. b. Detailed description of the equipment anchorage devices on which the certifications are based. c. Statement of Special Inspections:  Prepared by the registered design professional in responsible charge. E. Delegated-Design Submittal: 1. For each vibration isolation device. a. Include design calculations and details for selecting vibration isolators, vibration isolation bases, and appropriate attachment methods for all equipment. b. Design Calculations: Calculate static and dynamic loading due to equipment weight and required to select vibration isolators and for designing vibration isolation bases. F. Coordinate design calculations with wind load calculations required for equipment mounted outdoors. Comply with requirements in other Sections for equipment mounted outdoors. a. Riser Supports: Include riser diagrams and calculations showing anticipated expansion and contraction at each support point, initial and final loads on building structure and spring deflection changes. Include certification that riser system was examined for excessive stress and that none exists. University of Connecticut VIBRATION AND SEISMIC CONTROLS 23 0548 - 4 FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2. Mechanical equipment, appliances, ductwork, and supports that are exposed to wind shall be designed to resist the wind pressures determined in accordance with the International Building Code. a. Design Calculations: Calculate loading due to wind pressure and required to select vibration isolators and for designing vibration isolation bases. b. Include the seal of the Professional Structural Engineer registered where the Project is located, on the drawings and calculations. G. Manufacturer's Instructions:  Indicate installation instructions with special procedures and setting dimensions. 1.06 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Perform design and installation in accordance with applicable codes. B. Designer Qualifications:  Perform design under direct supervision of a Professional Engineer experienced in design of this type of work and registered and licensed in the State in which the Project is located. C. Manufacturer Qualifications:  Company specializing in manufacturing products specified in this section, with not less than three years of documented experience. 1. Member of Vibration Isolation and Seismic Control Manufacturers Association (VISCMA). D. Installer Qualifications:  Company specializing in performing the work of this section with minimum 3 years of experience. E. Testing Agency Qualifications:  Independent firm specializing in performing testing and inspections of the type specified in this section. F. Welding Qualifications: Qualify procedures and personnel according to AWS D1.1/D1.1M, "Structural Welding Code - Steel." 1.07 SEISMIC FORCE LEVELS A. Installations shall be designed to safely accept external forces determined in accordance with the International Building Code –2015, Section 1613 and ASCE 7 in any direction for all rigidly supported equipment without failure and permanent displacement of the equipment. Seismic restraints shall not short circuit vibration isolation systems or transmit objectionable vibration or noise. B. Seismic restraints for all systems shall be installed in accordance with: 1. Code IBC-2021 2. Use group III edit as required 3. Seismic design category B 4. Site Classification C 5. Building Ip (Importance Factor) 1 6. All Life safety systems Importance Factor = 1.5 7. Emergency Electrical Importance Factor = 1.5 8. HVAC a. Steam system Importance Factor = 1.5 b. Steam Condensate system Importance Factor = 1.5 University of Connecticut VIBRATION AND SEISMIC CONTROLS 23 0548 - 5 FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 c. Heat recovery piping system Importance Factor = 1.0 9. Other systems a. All other ductwork systems Importance Factor = 1.5 b. Critical Control conduits Importance Factor = 1.5 PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 MANUFACTURERS A. Mason Industries. B. Kinetics Noise Control, Inc. C. Vibration Eliminator Company, Inc. D. Novia Corporation 2.02 VIBRATION ISOLATORS, NON-SEISMIC TYPE A. Elastomeric Pads: 1. Material:  Oil, ozone, and oxidant resistant rubber, neoprene or other elastomeric compounds. 2. Thickness:  0.25 inch minimum. 3. Assembly:  Single or multiple layers using bonded, galvanized sheet metal separation plate between each layer with load plate providing evenly distributed load over pad surface. 4. Surface Pattern: Smooth, ribbed or waffle pattern. B. Elastomeric Mounts: 1. Material:  Oil, ozone, and oxidant resistant rubber, neoprene or other elastomeric compounds. 2. Assembly:  Encapsulated load transfer plate bolted to equipment and base plate with anchor hole bolted to supporting structure. C. Open Steel Springs: 1. Assembly:  Freestanding, laterally stable without housing. 2. Outside spring 3. Leveling Device:  Rigidly connected to equipment or frame. D. Restrained Steel Springs: 1. Housing:  Rigid blocking during rigging prevents equipment installed and operating height from changing during temporary weight reduction. 2. Equipment Wind Loading:  Adequate means for fastening isolator top to equipment and isolator base plate to supporting structure. E. Elastomeric Hangers: 1. Housing:  Steel construction containing elastomeric isolation element to prevent rod contact with housing and short-circuiting of isolating function. 2. Incorporate steel load distribution plate sandwiching elastomeric element to housing. F. Spring Hanger: 1. Description: Steel construction containing stable steel spring and integral elastomeric element preventing metal to metal contact. Mountings shall have University of Connecticut VIBRATION AND SEISMIC CONTROLS 23 0548 - 6 FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 leveling bolts that shall be rigidly bolted to the equipment. Spring diameters shall be no less than 0.8 of the compressed height of the spring at rated load. 2. Housing:  Steel construction containing stable steel spring and integral elastomeric element preventing metal to metal contact. 3. Bottom Opening:  Sized to allow plus/minus 15 degrees rod misalignment. G. Combination Elastomeric-Spring Hanger: 1. Housing:  Steel construction containing stable steel spring with elastomeric element in series isolating upper connection of hanger box to building structure. 2. Bottom Opening:  Sized to allow plus/minus 15 degrees rod misalignment. H. Thrust Restraints: 1. Housing:  Steel construction containing stable steel spring and integral elastomeric element installed in pairs to resist air pressure thrusts. 2. Bottom Openings:  Sized to allow plus/minus 15 degrees rod misalignment. 2.03 VIBRATION ISOLATORS, SEISMIC TYPE A. Coil Springs Consisting of Single Elements: 1. Housing Manufactured from cast iron material. 2. Ductile Material:  Designed and rated for seismic applications. 3. Spring:  Restrained by housing without significant degradation of vibration isolation capabilities during normal equipment operating conditions. 4. Resilient Snubbing Grommet System:  Incorporated and designed with clearances of no more than 0.25 inch in any direction preventing direct metal-to-metal contact between supported member and fixed restraint housing. 5. Resilient Pad:  Located in series with spring. 6. Coil Springs:  Color coded elements to have a lateral stiffness greater than 0.8 times the rated vertical stiffness with 50 percent overload capacity. 7. Finish:  Suitable for the application. B. All Directional Elastomeric: 1. Material:  Molded from oil, ozone, and oxidant resistant compounds. 2. Operating Parameters:  Designed to operate within the isolator strain limits providing maximum performance and service life. 3. Attachment Method:  Encapsulated load transfer plate bolted to equipment and base plate with anchor hole bolted to supporting structure. 4. Rating:  Cast iron and aluminum housings rated for seismic restraint applications. 5. Minimum Operating Static Deflections:  Deflections indicated in project documents are not to exceed published load capacities. 2.04 SEISMIC SNUBBER ASSEMBLIES A. Comply with: 1. ASHRAE (HVAC) Handbook - HVAC Applications. 2. FEMA 412. 3. FEMA 413. 4. FEMA 414. 5. FEMA E-74. 6. SMACNA (SRM). B. All Directional External: University of Connecticut VIBRATION AND SEISMIC CONTROLS 23 0548 - 7 FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1. Application:  Minimum three (3) snubbers are required for each equipment installation, oriented properly to restrain isolated equipment in all directions. 2. Construction:  Interlocking steel construction attached to the building structure and equipment in a manner consistent with anticipated design loads. 3. Performance:  Equipment movement at each snubber location limited to a maximum of 0.25 inches in any direction without significantly degrading the vibration isolation capability of the isolator during normal operating conditions. 4. Resilient Pad:  Minimum 0.25 inch thick cushions any impact and prevents metal.to-metal contact. C. Lateral External: 1. Application:  Minimum three (3) snubbers are required for each stable equipment installation, oriented properly to restrain isolated equipment in all lateral directions where uplift forces are zero or addressed by other restraints. 2. Construction:  Steel construction attached to the building structure and equipment in a manner consistent with anticipated design loads. 3. Performance:  Equipment movement at each snubber location limited to a maximum of    0.25 inches in any direction without significantly degrading the vibration isolation capability of the isolator during normal operating conditions. 4. Resilient Pad:  Minimum 0.25 inch thick cushions any impact and prevents metal.to-metal contact. D. Omni Directional External: 1. Application:  Minimum four (4) snubbers are required for each stable equipment installation, oriented properly to restrain isolated equipment in all lateral directions. 2. Construction:  Steel construction attached to the building structure and equipment in a manner consistent with anticipated design loads. 3. Performance:  Equipment movement at each snubber location limited to a maximum of    0.25 inches in any direction without significantly degrading the vibration isolation capability of the isolator during normal operating conditions. 4. Resilient Pad:  Minimum 0.25 inch thick cushions any impact and prevents metal.to-metal contact. E. Horizontal Single Axis External: 1. Application:  Minimum four (4) snubbers are required for each stable equipment installation, oriented properly to restrain isolated equipment in all lateral directions where uplift forces are zero or addressed by other restraints. 2. Construction:  Steel construction attached to the building structure and equipment in a manner consistent with anticipated design loads. 3. Performance:  Equipment movement at each snubber location limited to a maximum of 0.25 inches in any direction without significantly degrading the vibration isolation capability of the isolator during normal operating conditions. 4. Resilient Pad:  Minimum 0.25 inch thick cushions any impact and prevents metal.to-metal contact. 2.05 SEISMIC RESTRAINTS FOR SUSPENDED COMPONENTS AND EQUIPMENT A. Comply with: 1. ASHRAE (HVACA) Handbook - HVAC Applications. University of Connecticut VIBRATION AND SEISMIC CONTROLS 23 0548 - 8 FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2. FEMA 412. 3. FEMA 413. 4. FEMA 414. 5. FEMA E-74. 6. SMACNA (SRM). B. Cable Restraints: 1. Wire Rope:  Steel wire strand cables sized to resist seismic loads in all lateral directions. 2. Protective Thimbles:  Eliminates potential for dynamic cable wear and strand breakage. 3. Size:  Based on the lesser of cable capacity or anchor load taking into account bracket geometry. 4. Connections: a. Use overlapping wire rope U clips, cable clamping bolts, swaged sleeves or seismically rated tool-less wedge insert lock connectors. b. Internally brace clevis hanger bracket cross bolt to prevent deformation. 5. Vertical Suspension Rods:  Attach required bracing of sufficient strength to prevent rod buckling from vertical compression forces utilizing series of attachment clips. C. Rigid Restraints: 1. Structural Element:  Sized to resist seismic loads in all lateral directions and carry both compressive and tensile loading. 2. Size:  Based on the lesser of cable capacity or anchor load taking into account bracket geometry. 3. Connections:  Internally brace clevis hanger bracket cross bolt to prevent deformation. 4. Static Support System:  Anchorage capable of carrying additional tension loads generated by the vertical component of the rigid brace compression which is additive to any static load requirements on the system. 5. Vertical Suspension Rods:  Attached required bracing of sufficient strength to prevent rod buckling from vertical compression forces utilizing series of attachment clips. 2.06 EQUIPMENT SUPPORT BASES A. Spring Isolated Steel Rails: 1. Construction:  Engineered, structural steel frames with welded brackets for side mounting of the isolators. Roof Rails shall be flashed and waterproofed into the roof’s membrane waterproofing system. 2. Frames:  Square, rectangular or T-shaped. 3. Design:  Sufficiently rigid to prevent misalignment or undue stress on machine, and to transmit design loads to isolators and snubbers. 4. Applications:  Adjustable motor slide rails for centrifugal fans. B. Concrete Inertia Bases: 1. Construction:  Engineered, steel forms, with integrated isolator brackets and anchor bolts, welded or tied reinforcing bars running both ways in a single layer. 2. Size:  6 inches minimum depth and sized to accommodate elbow supports. University of Connecticut VIBRATION AND SEISMIC CONTROLS 23 0548 - 9 FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 3. Mass:  Minimum of 1.5 times weight of isolated equipment. 4. Connecting Point:  Reinforced to connect isolators and snubbers to base including template and fastening devices for equipment. 5. Concrete:  Filled on site with minimum 3000 psi concrete.  See Section 03 3000 for additional requirements. 6. Applications:  Adjustable motor slide rails for centrifugal fans. 2.07 EXTERIOR DUCTWORK SUPPORTS A. Steel Rails: 1. Construction:  Engineered, enclosed structural steel frame with welded brackets. Roof supports shall be flashed and waterproofed into the roof’s membrane waterproofing system.  2. Frames:  Square, rectangular or T-shaped. 3. Design:  Sufficiently rigid to prevent misalignment or undue stress on ductwork, and to transmit design loads to structure. a. Design loads to conform to requirements of this section for static, dynamic, and wind loads. 4. Weather exposed components consist of corrosion resistant materials. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 INSTALLATION - GENERAL A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Bases: 1. Set steel bases for one inch clearance between housekeeping pad and base. 2. Set concrete inertia bases for 2 inches clearance between housekeeping pad and base. 3. Adjust equipment level. C. On closed spring isolators, adjust so side stabilizers are clear under normal operating conditions. D. Prior to making piping connections to equipment with operating weights substantially different from installed weights, block up equipment with temporary shims to final height.  When full load is applied, adjust isolators to load to allow shim removal. E. Provide pairs of horizontal limit springs on fans with more than 6.0 inches WC static pressure, and on hanger supported, horizontally mounted axial fans. F. Support piping connections to equipment mounted on isolators using isolators or resilient hangers for scheduled distance. 1. Up to 4 Inches Pipe Size:  First three points of support. 2. 5 to 8 Inches Pipe Size:  First four points of support. 3. 10 inches Pipe Size and Over: First six points of support. 4. Select three hangers closest to vibration source for minimum 1.0 inch static deflection or static deflection of isolated equipment.  Select remaining isolators for minimum 1.0 inch static deflection or 1/2 static deflection of isolated equipment. G. All vibration isolators and seismic restraint systems must be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturers written instructions and all certified submittal data. University of Connecticut VIBRATION AND SEISMIC CONTROLS 23 0548 - 10 FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 H. Installation of vibration isolators and seismic restraints must not cause any change of position of equipment, piping or ductwork resulting in stresses or misalignment. I. No rigid connections between equipment and the building structure shall be made that degrades the noise and vibration control system herein specified. J. The contractor shall not install any equipment, piping, duct or conduit that makes rigid connections with the building unless isolation is not specified. "Building" includes, but is not limited to, slabs, beams, columns, studs and walls. Any conflicts with other trades that will result in rigid contact with equipment or piping due to inadequate space or other unforeseen conditions should be brought to the architects/engineers attention prior to installation. Corrective work necessitated by conflicts after installation shall be at the responsible contractor’s expense. K. Bring to the architects/engineers attention any discrepancies between the specifications and the field conditions or changes required due to specific equipment selection, prior to installation. Corrective work necessitated by discrepancies after installation shall be at the responsible contractor’s expense. L. Cast in place inserts or wedge type drill-in concrete anchors. All vibration isolators, base frames and inertia bases to conform to all uniform deflection and stability requirements under all operating loads. M. Steel springs to operate in the linear portion of the load versus deflection curve over deflection range of not less than 50 percent above specified deflection. N. Lateral to vertical stiffness ratio to not exceed 0.08 with spring deflection at minimum 75 percent of specified deflection. O. All equipment mounted on vibration isolated bases to have minimum operating clearance of 2 inches between the base and floor or support beneath unless noted otherwise. 3.02 INSTALLATION OF CONCRETE INERTIA BASES A. Minimum operating clearance between concrete inertia and base and housekeeping pad or floor shall be 2”. B. The equipment structural steel or concrete inertia base shall be placed in position and supported temporarily by blocks or shims, as appropriate, prior to the installation of the machine or isolators. C. The isolators shall be installed without raising the machine and frame assembly. D. After the installation is complete and under full load, the isolators shall be adjusted so that the load is transferred from the blocks to the isolators. When all isolators are properly adjusted, the blocks or shims shall be removed. E. Verify that all installed isolator and mounting systems permit equipment motion in all directions. Adjust or provide additional resilient restraints to flexibly limit start-up equipment lateral motion to 1/4”. F. Prior to start-up, clean out all foreign matter between bases and equipment. Verify that there are no isolation short circuits in the base, isolators, or seismic restraints. 3.03 PIPING SYSTEM VIBRATION ISOLATION A. Vibration isolators for suspended piping: University of Connecticut VIBRATION AND SEISMIC CONTROLS 23 0548 - 11 FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1. Provide spring hangers for all piping in equipment rooms and up to 50 ft from vibration-isolated equipment and PRV stations. The first three hangers from the equipment shall be provided with the same deflection as the equipment isolators, with a maximum limitation of 2 in. deflection. Remaining hangers shall be spring or combination spring and elastomeric with 0.75 in. deflection. The first two hangers adjacent to the equipment shall be the positioning or pre-compressed type. Provide positioning hangers for all isolated piping 8 in. and larger. Piping over 2 inches in diameter suspended below or within 50 ft of conference rooms, classrooms and auditorium areas shall be hung with isolation hangers. B. Vibration isolators for floor-supported piping: 1. Provide vibration isolators for floor supports for piping in equipment rooms to isolate equipment. Isolators shall be selected according to the guidelines for hangers. The first two adjacent floor supports shall be the restrained spring type, with a restraint/blocking feature to prevent load transfer to equipment flanges as the piping is filled or drained. Provide a slide plate where pipe is subjected to large thermal movement (PTFE, graphite, or steel) and shall be installed on top of the isolator. Provide a thermal barrier when rubber products are installed directly beneath steam or hot-water lines. 3.04 INSTALLATION - SEISMIC A. Comply with: 1. ASHRAE (HVACA) Handbook - HVAC Applications. 2. FEMA 412. 3. FEMA 413. 4. FEMA 414. 5. FEMA E-74. 6. SMACNA (SRM). B. Seismic Snubbers: 1. Provide on all isolated equipment, piping and ductwork. 2. Provide minimum of four seismic snubbers located close to isolators. 3. Snub equipment designated for post-disaster use to 0.05 inch maximum clearance. 4. Snub all other equipment between 0.15 inch and 0.25 inch clearance. C. Floor and Base-Mounted Equipment, Vibration Isolated Equipment and associated Vibration and Seismic Controls for Connections: 1. Install equipment anchorage items designed to resist seismic design force in any direction. 2. Install vibration and seismic controls designed to include base and isolator requirements. 3. Provide flexible connections between equipment and interconnected piping. 4. Provide isolators and restraints designed for amplified code forces per ASCE 7 and with demonstrated ability to resist required forces including gravity, operational and seismic forces. 5. Where equipment is not designed to be point loaded, provide base capable of transferring gravity and seismic demands from equipment to isolator base plate anchorage. University of Connecticut VIBRATION AND SEISMIC CONTROLS 23 0548 - 12 FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 6. Where concrete floor thickness is less than required for expansion anchor installation, install through bolt in lieu of expansion anchor. 7. Where timber/wood floor or other substrate is inadequate for installation of lag bolts, screws or other mechanical fasteners, install supplemental framing or blocking to transfer loads to structural elements. D. Suspended Mechanical Equipment: 1. Provide supports and bracing to resist seismic design force in any direction. 2. Provide flexible connections between equipment and interconnected piping. 3. Brace equipment hung from spring mounts using cable or other bracing that will not transmit vibration to the structure. 4. Use of proprietary restraint systems with a certificate of compliance, verified and listed by an accredited inspection body is acceptable (pending shop drawing approval), as an alternative to project specific seismic bracing design. E. Wall mounted Mechanical Equipment: 1. Provide support and bracing to resist seismic design force in any direction. 2. Install backing plates or blocking as required to deliver load to primary wall framing members. 3. Anchoring to gypsum wallboard, plaster or other wall finish that has not been engineered to resist imposed loads is not permitted. F. Piping: 1. Provide seismic bracing in accordance ASCE 7. 2. Provide supports, braces, and anchors to resist gravity and seismic design forces. 3. Provide flexible connections between floor mounted equipment and suspended piping; between unbraced piping and restrained suspended items; as required for thermal movement; at building separations and seismic joints; and wherever relative differential movements could damage pipe in an earthquake. 4. Brace resiliently supported pipe with cable bracing or alternate means designed to prevent transmission of vibrations and noise to the structure. 5. Brace every run 5.0 feet or more in length with two transverse and one longitudinal bracing locations. 6. Pipes and Connections Constructed of Ductile Materials (copper, ductile iron, steel or aluminum and brazed, welded or screwed connections): a. Provide transverse bracing at spacing not more than 40.0 feet on center. b. Provide longitudinal bracing at spacing not more than 80.0 feet on center. 7. Pipes and Connections Constructed of Non Ductile Materials (cast iron, no-hub, plastic or non-UL listed grooved coupling pipe): a. Provide transverse bracing at spacing not more than 20.0 feet on center. b. Provide longitudinal bracing at spacing not more than 40.0 feet on center. 8. Provide lateral restraint for risers at not more than 30 feet on center or as required for horizontal runs, whichever is less. 9. Piping Explicitly Exempt from Seismic Bracing Requirements: a. Provide flexible connections between piping and connected equipment, including in-line devices such as VAV boxes and reheat coils. b. Install piping consistent with ASCE 7, such that swinging of the pipes will not cause damaging impact with adjacent components, finishes, or structural fr University of Connecticut VIBRATION AND SEISMIC CONTROLS 23 0548 - 13 FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 aming while maintaining clear horizontal distance of 67 percent of the hanger length between subject components. c. Provide swing restraints as required to control potential impact due to limited space between subject components. 10. Use of proprietary restraint systems with a certificate of compliance, verified and listed by an accredited inspection body is acceptable (pending shop drawing approval), as an alternative to project specific seismic bracing design. 11. Re-use of Existing Hangers: a. Re-using existing hangers at locations of seismic bracing are to be judged on a case-by-case basis by the registered project design professional. b. Unless otherwise shown on the drawings, it is assumed all hangers supporting new piping, located at a seismic brace, will be new. G. Ductwork: 1. Provide seismic bracing for ducts with cross sectional area greater than 6 sq ft (independent of duct contents). 2. Provide seismic bracing for all ducts containing hazardous materials. 3. Provide supports, braces, and anchors to resist gravity and seismic design forces. 4. Install ducts and duct risers designed to accommodate interstory drift. 5. Independently support in-line devices weighing more than 20 pounds. 6. Independently support and brace all in-line devices weighing more than 75 pounds. 7. Provide unbraced piping attached to braced in-line equipment with adequate flexibility to accommodate differential displacements. 8. Positively attach dampers, louvers, diffusers and similar appurtenances to ductwork with mechanical fasteners. 9. Install duct supports designed to resist not less than 150 percent of the duct weight. 10. 1The use of power driven fasteners is prohibited in the hanging of ducts weighing over 10 pounds per lineal foot for seismic design categories D, E, and F. 11. 1Use of proprietary restraint systems with a certificate of compliance, verified and listed by an IAS AC172 accredited inspection body or otherwise accepted by applicable codes is acceptable (pending shop drawing approval), as an alternative to project specific seismic bracing design. H. Tanks: 1. Install tank anchorage, tank legs and/or supporting structure designed to resist design force. 2. Provide flexible connections between tank and interconnected piping. 3.05 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Inspect isolated equipment after installation and submit report.  Include static deflections. B. Perform testing and inspections of the installation in accordance with Section 01 4533. 3.06 SCHEDULE University of Connecticut VIBRATION AND SEISMIC CONTROLS 23 0548 - 14 FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 A. Provide vibration isolators and equipment bases for all rotating, piston driven or vibrating equipment in accordance with the following schedules. Selection of equipment isolators shall be based on approved equipment shop drawings. B. This section does not apply to surface mounted, fractional horsepower HVAC equipment such as ceiling fans and VRF cassette units; install per manufacturers’ instructions. Base & Isolator Types  Base Types  Isolator Types  None  No base, isolators attached directly to equipment. Suspend equipment securely from structure or floor-mount equipment on concrete housekeeping pad.  EL  Elastomeric pad, floor mount or hanger. Use restrained elastomeric mount where seismic restraint is required.  Steel  Structural steel rails or base.  Spring  Spring floor isolator or hanger. Use restrained spring isolator where seismic restraint is required.  Inertia Base  Concrete inertia base.  Curb  Roof curb or curb rails  Vibration Isolation - Pumps  Type  HP  RP M  Equipment Location  Tab le Not es  Slab on grade  Indoors, mounted to structure  Roof  Base Type  Isolat or Type  Min Defl., (in.)  Base Type  Isolat or Type  Min Defl., (in.)  Base Type  Isolat or Type  Min Defl., (in.)  Close Couple d  ≤7. 5  All  N/A  N/A  N/A  None  Sprin g  0.75  N/A  N/A  N/A  2  ≥1 0  All  N/A  N/A  N/A  None  Sprin g  1.5  N/A  N/A  N/A  2  Base.mounte d Inline  5 to 25  All  N/A  N/A  N/A  None  Sprin g  1.5  N/A  N/A  N/A  2  ≥3 0  All  N/A  N/A  N/A  Inerti a Base  Sprin g  2.5  N/A  N/A  N/A  1  End suction and split case  ≤4 0  All  N/A  N/A  N/A  Inerti a Base  Sprin g  1.5  N/A  N/A  N/A  1  50 to 12  All  N/A  N/A  N/A  Inerti a Base  Sprin g  2.5  N/A  N/A  N/A  1  University of Connecticut VIBRATION AND SEISMIC CONTROLS 23 0548 - 15 FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 University of Connecticut VIBRATION AND SEISMIC CONTROLS 23 0548 - 16 5  ≥1 50  All  N/A  N/A  N/A  Inerti a Base  Sprin g  3.5  N/A  N/A  N/A  1  Notes: Pumps: Concrete Inertia bases strength and shape shall accommodate base elbow supports. Concrete Inertia bases shall be designed for a thickness of one-tenth the longest dimension with minimum thickness as follows: (1) for up to 30 hp, 6 in.; (2) for 40 to 75 hp, 8 in.; and (3) for 100 hp and up, 12 in. Pumps over 75 hp and multistage pumps shall be provided with supplemental restraining devices. Spring isolators shall be provided for pumps suspended from structure. Floor mounted pumps do not require spring isolators.  Vibration Isolation - Axial Fans  Type  Sta tic Pre s.sur e  RP M  Equipment Location  Tab le Not es  Slab on Grade  Upper Floor  Roof  Base Type  Isolat or Type  Min Defl., (in.)  Base Type  Isolat or Type  Min Defl., (in.)  Base Type  Isolat or Type  Min Defl., (in.)  Up to 22 in. diamete r  All  All  None  EL  0.25  None  Sprin g  0.75  Curb or Steel  Sprin g  0.75  1,3  24 in. diamete r & up  ≤2 in. SP  Up to 30 0  Steel  Sprin g  2.5  Steel  Sprin g  3.5  Curb or Steel  Sprin g  3.5  3  30 0 to 50 0  Steel  Sprin g  0.75  Steel  Sprin g  1.5  Curb or Steel  Sprin g  1.5  3  50 1 an d up  Steel  Sprin g  0.75  Steel  Sprin g  1.5  Curb or Steel  Sprin g  1.5  3  ≥2. 1 in. SP  Up to 30 0  Inerti a Base  Sprin g  2.5  Inerti a Base  Sprin g  3.5  Curb or Steel  Sprin g  3.5  3  30 0 to  Inerti a Base  Sprin g  1.5  Inerti a Base  Sprin g  1.5  Curb or Steel  Sprin g  1.5  2,3  FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 University of Connecticut VIBRATION AND SEISMIC CONTROLS 23 0548 - 17 50 0  50 1 an d up  Inerti a Base  Sprin g  0.75  Inerti a Base  Sprin g  1.5  Curb or Steel  Sprin g  1.5  2.3  Notes: Where equipment manufacturer indicates component cannot be installed directly on individual isolators provide equipment manufacturer recommended supplemental support (base type). Select isolator deflection so that resonance frequency is 40 percent or less of the lowest normal operating speed of equipment. Add a 1 in. thick pad to the base plate of spring isolators. To limit undesirable movement, thrust restraints are required for all ceiling-suspended and floor-mounted units operating at 2 in. of water or more total static pressure.  Vibration Isolation – Centrifugal and Mixed-Flow Fans  Type  HP  RP M  Equipment Location  Tab le Not es  Exterior, Slab on Grade  Indoors  Roof  Base Type  Isolat or Type  Min Defl., (in.)  Base Type  Isolat or Type  Min Defl., (in.)  Base Type  Isolat or Type  Min Defl., (in.)  Up to 22 in. diamete r  All  All  Steel  EL  0.25  Steel  Sprin g  0.75  Curb or Steel  Sprin g  0.75  3  24 in. diamete r & up  ≤4 0  Up to 30 0  Steel  Sprin g  2.5  Steel  Sprin g  3.5  Curb or Steel  Sprin g  3.5  2  30 0 to 50 0  Steel  Sprin g  1.5  Steel  Sprin g  1.5  Curb or Steel  Sprin g  1.5  2  50 1 an d up  Steel  Sprin g  0.75  Steel  Sprin g  0.75  Curb or Steel  Sprin g  0.75  2  ≥5 0  Up to 30 0  Inerti a Base  Sprin g  2.5  Inerti a Base  Sprin g  3.5  Curb or Steel  Sprin g  3.5  1,2, 3  30 0  Inerti a  Sprin g  1.5  Inerti a  Sprin g  1.5  Curb or  Sprin g  1.5  1,2, 3  FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 to  Base  Base  Steel  50  0  50 1 an d up  Inerti a Base  Sprin g  1.0  Inerti a Base  Sprin g  1.5  Curb or Steel  Sprin g  1.5  1,2, 3  Roof  Curb  Mounte d  All  All  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  N/A  Curb  None  N/A  Ventilat  ors  Notes: Increase isolator deflection so isolator stiffness is less than one-tenth the stiffness of the supporting structure, as defined by the deflection due to load at the equipment support. Select isolator deflection so that resonance frequency is 40 percent or less of the lowest normal operating speed of equipment. Add a 1 in. thick pad to the base plate of spring isolators. Provide thrust restraints for all ceiling-suspended and floor-mounted units operating at 2 in. of water or more total static pressure. General Note for Fans: For fans operating under 300 rpm, select isolator deflection so the isolator natural frequency is 40 percent or less than the fan speed. Flexible duct connectors shall be installed at the intake and discharge of all fans and air-handling equipment to reduce vibration transmission to air duct structures. Provide thrust restraints with same deflection as isolators for all fans and all base-mounted and suspended air-handling equipment operating at 2 in. or more total static pressure. Adjust restraint movement under normal operational static pressures. University of Connecticut VIBRATION AND SEISMIC CONTROLS 23 0548 - 18 FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 University of Connecticut VIBRATION AND SEISMIC CONTROLS 23 0548 - 19 Vibration Isolation – Propeller Fans  Type  HP  RP M  Equipment Location  Tab le Not es  Exterior, Slab on Grade  Indoors  Roof  Base Type  Isolat or Type  Min Defl., (in.)  Base Type  Isolat or Type  Min Defl., (in.)  Base Type  Isolat or Type  Min Defl., (in.)  Wall- All  All  None  None  None  None  EL  0.25  None  EL  0.25  mounte  d  Roof.mounte d  All  All  None  None  None  Steel or Curb  Sprin g  1.5  Curb or Steel  Sprin g  1.5  Vibration Isolation – Air-Cooled Condensing Units  Type  To ns  RP M  Equipment Location  Tab le Not es  Exterior, Slab on Grade  Indoors  Roof  Base Type  Isolat or Type  Min Defl., (in.)  Base Type  Isolat or Type  Min Defl., (in.)  Base Type  Isolat or Type  Min Defl., (in.)  Individu al Conden sing Units  ≤5  All  None  EL  0.25  N/A  N/A  N/A  Curb or Steel  EL  0.25  1  >5.<1 0  All  None  EL  0.25  N/A  N/A  N/A  Curb or Steel  Sprin g  0.75  1  ≥1 0  All  None  EL  0.25  N/A  N/A  N/A  Curb or Steel  Sprin g  1.5  1  Multi-split and VRF Conden sing Units  All  All  None  EL  0.25  N/A  N/A  N/A  Curb or Steel  EL  0.25  1  FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 Notes: Where available, use of equipment manufacturer internal isolators meeting the above requirements is acceptable. Coordinate with equipment manufacturer. Provide documentation in both equipment submittals and in submittals for this Section. Vibration Isolation – Air Handling Units (Including AHU, DOAS, RTU, MAU, BCU, H&V Units)  Type  Fan HP, Stati c Pres sure  RP M  Equipment Location  Tab le Not es  Slab on Grade  Indoors  Roof  Base Type  Isolat or Type  Min Defl., (in.)  Base Type  Isolat or Type  Min Defl., (in.)  Base Type  Isolat or Type  Min Defl., (in.)  All  ≤10  All  None  Sprin g  0.75  None  Sprin g  0.75  Curb or Steel  Sprin g  0.75  5  ≥15, ≤4 in. SP  Up to 30 0  None  Sprin g  0.75  None  Sprin g  3.5  Curb or Steel  Sprin g  3.5  1,3, 4,5  30 0 to 50 0  None  Sprin g  0.75  None  Sprin g  2.5  Curb or Steel  Sprin g  2.5  3,5  50 1 an d up  None  Sprin g  0.75  None  Sprin g  1.5  Curb or Steel  Sprin g  1.5  3,5  ≥15, ≥4 in. SP  Up to 30 0  None  Sprin g  0.75  None  Sprin g  3.5  Curb or Steel  Sprin g  3.5  1,2, 3,4, 5  30 0 to 50 0  None  Sprin g  0.75  None  Sprin g  2.5  Curb or Steel  Sprin g  2.5  1,2, 3,5  50 1 an d up  None  Sprin g  0.75  None  Sprin g  1.5  Curb or Steel  Sprin g  2.5  1,2, 3,5  University of Connecticut VIBRATION AND SEISMIC CONTROLS 23 0548 - 20 FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 Notes: Where available, use of packaged equipment manufacturer internal isolators meeting the above requirements is acceptable. Coordinate with equipment manufacturer. Provide documentation in both equipment submittals and in submittals for this Section. Increase isolator deflection so isolator stiffness is less than one-tenth the stiffness of the supporting structure, as defined by the deflection due to load at the equipment support. Where equipment manufacturer indicates component cannot be installed directly on individual isolators provide equipment manufacturer recommended supplemental support (base type). Select isolator deflection so that resonance frequency is 40 percent or less of the lowest normal operating speed of equipment. Add a 1 in. thick pad to the base plate of spring isolators. Provide thrust restraints for all ceiling-suspended and floor-mounted units operating at 2 in. of water or more total static pressure. General Note for Air-Handling Equipment: For fans operating under 300 rpm, select isolator deflection so the isolator natural frequency is 40 percent or less than the fan speed.  Flexible duct connectors shall be installed at the intake and discharge of all fans and air-handling equipment to reduce vibration transmission to air duct structures. Provide thrust restraints with the same deflection as isolators for all fans and all base-mounted and suspended air-handling equipment operating at 2 in. or more total static pressure. Adjust restraint movement under normal operational static pressures. Vibration Isolation – Ducted Rotating Equipment  Type  Airfl ow (CF M)  RP M  Equipment Location  Tab le Not es  Exterior, Slab on Grade  Indoors  Roof  Base Type  Isola tor Type  Min Defl. , (in.)  Base Type  Isolat or Type  Min Defl., (in.)  Base Type  Isolat or Type  Min Defl., (in.)  Fan. powere d VAV  ≤600  All  N/A  N/A  N/A  None  EL  0.25  N/A  N/A  N/A  boxes Suspen ded Fan coil units Suspen ded Cabinet heaters  ≥601 -200 0  All  N/A  N/A  N/A  None  Sprin g  0.75  N/A  N/A  N/A  University of Connecticut VIBRATION AND SEISMIC CONTROLS 23 0548 - 21 FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 and unit heaters  Floor-Mounte d Fan coil  ≤600  All  N/A  N/A  N/A  None  EL  0.25  N/A  N/A  N/A  units Floor-Mounte d Cabinet heaters and unit heaters  ≥601 -200 0  All  N/A  N/A  N/A  None  EL  0.25  N/A  N/A  N/A  Small in-line fans  ≤600  All  N/A  N/A  N/A  None  EL  0.25  N/A  N/A  N/A  END OF SECTION University of Connecticut IDENTIFICATION FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 23 0553 -1 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 SECTION 23 0553 IDENTIFICATION FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Nameplates. B. Tags. C. Duct Markers. D. Pipe markers. E. Warning Signs and Labels F. Warning Tags G. Ceiling Tacks 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this section. B. Division 09-Finishes. 1.03 REFERENCE STANDARDS (FOLLOW THE MOST CURRENTLY ADOPTED AMENDEDVERSION) A. ASME A13.1 -Scheme for the Identification of Piping Systems. B. ASTM D709 -Standard Specification for Laminated Thermosetting Materials. 1.04 SUBMITTALS A. List: Submit list of wording, symbols, letter size, and color coding for mechanical identification. B. Chart and Schedule: Submit valve chart and schedule, including valve tag number, location, function, and valve manufacturer's name and model number. C. Product Data: Provide manufacturers catalog literature for each product required. D. Manufacturer's Installation Instructions: Indicate special procedures, and installation. E. Project Record Documents: 1. Valve Schedules: For each piping system. Tabulate valve number, piping system, system abbreviation (as shown on valve tag), location of valve (room or space), normal-operating position (open, closed, or modulating), and variations for identification. Mark valves for emergency shutoff and similar special uses. 2. Equipment Schedules: For each item of equipment to be labeled. Tabulate equipment identification number and identify Drawing numbers where equipment is indicated (plans, details, and schedules), plus the Specification Section number and title where equipment is specified. Equipment schedule shall be included in operation and maintenance data. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 EQUIPMENT NAMEPLATES A. Manufacturers: 1. Advanced Graphic Engraving, LLC University of Connecticut IDENTIFICATION FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 23 0553 -2 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2. Brimar Industries, Inc; 3. Kolbi Pipe Marker Co. 4. Seton Identification Products B. Metal Labels for Equipment: 1. Material and Thickness: Brass, 0.032-inch, Stainless steel, 0.025-inch, Aluminum, 0.032-inchor anodized aluminum, 0.032-inchminimum thickness, and having predrilled or stamped holes for attachment hardware. 2. Minimum Label Size: Length and width vary for required label content, but not less than 2-1/2 by 3/4 inch. 3. Minimum Letter Size: 1/4 inch for name of units if viewing distance is less than 24 inches, 1/2 inch for viewing distances up to 72 inches, and proportionately larger lettering for greater viewing distances. Include secondary lettering two-thirds to three-fourths the size of principal lettering. 4. Fasteners: Stainless-steel rivets or self-tapping screws. 5. Adhesive: Contact-type permanent adhesive, compatible with label and with substrate. C. Plastic Labels for Equipment: 1. Material and Thickness: Conform to ASTM D709. Multilayer, multicolor, plastic labels for mechanical engraving, minimum 1/16 inch thick, and having predrilled holes for attachment hardware. 2. Letter Color: White. 3. Background Color: Black. 4. Maximum Temperature: Able to withstand temperatures up to 160 deg F. 5. Minimum Label Size: Length and width vary for required label content, but not less than 2-1/2 by 3/4 inch 6. Minimum Letter Size: 1/4 inch for name of units if viewing distance is less than 24 inches, 1/2 inch for viewing distances up to 72 inches, and proportionately larger lettering for greater viewing distances. Include secondary lettering two-thirds to three-fourths the size of principal lettering. 7. Fasteners: Stainless-steel rivets or self-tapping screws. 8. Adhesive: Contact-type permanent adhesive, compatible with label and with substrate. D. Label Content: Include equipment's Drawing designation or unique equipment number. 2.02 TAGS A. Manufacturers: 1. Advanced Graphic Engraving 2. Brady Corporation 3. Brimar Industries, Inc 4. Kolbi Pipe Marker Co 5. Seton Identification Products, a Tricor Company 6. Substitutions: See Division 01-General Requirements. B. Metal Tags: Brass, 0.032-inch minimum thickness, and having predrilled or stamped holes for attachment hardware. Brass wire-link, beaded chain or S-hook fasteners. Minimum 1-1/2 inch diameter with smooth edges. University of Connecticut IDENTIFICATION FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 23 0553 -3 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2.03 DUCT MARKERS A. Manufacturers: 1. Brimar Industries, Inc 2. Kolbi Pipe Marker Co 3. Seton Identification Products B. General Requirements for Manufactured Duct Labels: Preprinted self-adhesive, premium grade vinyl, color-coded, with lettering indicating service, and showing flow direction. C. Material: High gloss acrylic adhesive-backed vinyl film 0.0032 inch printed with UV and chemical resistant inks. D. Maximum Temperature: Able to withstand temperatures up to 160 deg F. E. Adhesive: Contact-type permanent adhesive, compatible with label and with substrate. F. Contents: Include identification of duct service using same designations or abbreviations as used on Drawings, duct size, and an arrow indicating flow direction. 1. Flow-Direction Arrows: Integral with duct system service lettering to accommodate both directions, or as separate unit on each duct label to indicate flow direction. 2. Lettering Size: Prepared with letter sizes according to ASME A13.1, at least 1-1/2 inches high. 2.04 PIPE MARKERS A. Manufacturers: 1. Brady Corporation 2. Brimar Industries, Inc 3. Kolbi Pipe Marker Co 4. MIFAB, Inc 5. Seton Identification Products B. General Requirements for Manufactured Pipe Labels: Preprinted, color-coded, with lettering indicating service, and showing flow direction. C. Plastic Pipe Markers: Factory fabricated, flexible, semi-rigid plastic, preformed to fit around pipe or pipe covering; minimum information indicating flow direction arrow and identification of fluid being conveyed. D. Plastic Tape Pipe Markers: Flexible, vinyl film tape with pressure sensitive adhesive backing and printed markings. E. Underground Plastic Pipe Markers: Bright colored continuously printed plastic ribbon tape, minimum 6 inches wide by 4 mil thick, manufactured for direct burial service. F. Pipe Label Contents: Include identification of piping service using same designations or abbreviations as used on Drawings, pipe size, and an arrow indicating flow direction. 1. Flow-Direction Arrows: Integral with piping system service lettering to accommodate both directions, or as separate unit on each pipe label to indicate flow direction. 2. Lettering Size: Prepared with letter sizes according to ASME A13.1, at least 1-1/2 inches high. University of Connecticut IDENTIFICATION FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 23 0553 -4 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2.05 WARNING SIGNS AND LABELS A. Material and Thickness: Multilayer, multicolor, plastic labels for mechanical engraving, 1/8 inch thick, and having predrilled holes for attachment hardware. B. Letter Color: White. C. Background Color: Red. D. Maximum Temperature: Able to withstand temperatures up to 160 deg F. E. Minimum Label Size: Length and width vary for required label content, but not less than 2-1/2 by 3/4 inch. F. Minimum Letter Size: 1/4 inch for name of units if viewing distance is less than 24 inches, 1/2 inch for viewing distances up to 72 inches, and proportionately larger lettering for greater viewing distances. Include secondary lettering two-thirds to three-fourths the size of principal lettering. G. Fasteners: Stainless-steel rivets or self-tapping screws. H. Adhesive: Contact-type permanent adhesive, compatible with label and with substrate. I. Label Content: Include caution and warning information, plus emergency notification instructions. 2.06 WARNING TAGS A. Warning Tags: Preprinted or partially preprinted, accident-prevention tags, of plasticized card stock with matte finish suitable for writing. 1. Size: Approximately 4 by 7 inches. 2. Fasteners: Reinforced grommet and wire or string. 3. Nomenclature: Large-size primary caption such as "DANGER," "CAUTION," or "DO NOT OPERATE." 4. Color: Red, white, black. 2.07 CEILING TACKS A. Manufacturers: 1. Brimar 2. Craftmark 3. Seton Identification B. Products Description: Steel with 3/4 inch diameter color coded head. C. Color code as follows: 1. HVAC Equipment: Yellow. 2. Fire Dampers and Smoke Dampers: Red. 3. Heating/Cooling Valves: Blue. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 PREPARATION A. Degrease and clean surfaces to receive adhesive for identification materials. 3.02 EQUIPMENT LABEL INSTALLATION University of Connecticut IDENTIFICATION FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 23 0553 -5 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 A. Install or permanently fasten labels on each major item of mechanical equipment, including all scheduled equipment on the drawings, air terminal units, automatic control devices, control panels, instruments, relays and major control components. B. Locate equipment labels where accessible and readable from the floor. C. Install nameplates with corrosive-resistant mechanical fasteners, or adhesive. Apply with sufficient adhesive to ensure permanent adhesion and seal with clear lacquer. 3.03 VALVE TAG INSTALLATION A. Install tags on valves and control devices in piping systems, except check valves; valves within factory-fabricated equipment units; shutoff valves; faucets; convenience and lawn-watering hose connections; and HVAC terminal devices and similar roughing-in connections of end-use fixtures and units. List tagged valves in a valve schedule. B. Valve-Tag Application: 1. Valve-Tag Size and Shape: 1-1/2 inches, round. 2. Valve-Tag Color: Natural 3. Letter Color: Black 3.04 PIPE LABEL INSTALLATION A. Install plastic pipe markers in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Install plastic tape pipe markers complete around pipe in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. C. Locate pipe labels where piping is exposed or above accessible ceilings in finished spaces; machine rooms; accessible maintenance spaces such as shafts, tunnels, and plenums; and exterior exposed locations as follows: 1. Near each valve and control device. 2. Near each branch connection, excluding short takeoffs for fixtures and terminal units. Where flow pattern is not obvious, mark each pipe at branch. 3. Near penetrations through walls, floors, ceilings, and inaccessible enclosures. 4. At access doors, manholes, and similar access points that permit view of concealed piping. 5. Near major equipment items and other points of origination and termination. 6. Spaced at maximum intervals of 50 feet along each run. Reduce intervals to 25 feet in areas of congested piping and equipment. 7. On piping above removable acoustical ceilings. Omit intermediately spaced labels. D. Install underground plastic pipe markers 6 to 8 inches below finished grade, directly above buried pipe. E. Pipe Label Color Schedule: 1. Potable, Cooling, Heating and Other Water Piping: a. Background Color: Green. b. Letter Color: White. 2. Combustible Fluid Piping: a. Background Color: Brown. b. Letter Color: White. 3. Flammable & Oxidizing Fluid Piping: University of Connecticut IDENTIFICATION FOR HVAC PIPING AND EQUIPMENT 23 0553 -6 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 a. Background Color: Yellow. b. Letter Color: Black. 4. Toxic & Corrosive Piping: a. Background Color: Orange. b. Letter Color: Black. F. Identify valves in main and branch piping with tags. 3.05 DUCT LABEL INSTALLATION A. Install duct labels with permanent adhesive on air ducts in the following color codes: 1. Blue: For cold-air supply ducts. 2. Yellow: For hot-air supply ducts. 3. Green: For exhaust-, outside-, relief-, return-, and mixed-air ducts. 4. ASME A13.1 Colors and Designs: For hazardous material exhaust. B. Locate labels near points where ducts enter into concealed spaces and at maximum intervals of 50 feet in each space where ducts are exposed or concealed by removable ceiling system. 3.06 CEILING TACK INSTALLATION A. Locate ceiling tacks to locate valves or dampers above lay-in panel ceilings. Locate in corner of panel closest to equipment. 3.07 WARNING-TAG INSTALLATION A. Write required message on, and attach warning tags to, equipment and other items where required. END OF SECTION University of Connecticut TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR HVAC 23 0593 - 1 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 SECTION 23 0593 TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR HVAC PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Testing, adjustment, and balancing of air systems. B. Testing, adjustment, and balancing of hydronic, steam, and refrigerating systems. C. Measurement of final operating condition of HVAC systems. D. Sound measurement of equipment operating conditions. E. Vibration measurement of equipment operating conditions. 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this section. 1.03 REFERENCE STANDARDS (FOLLOW THE MOST CURRENTLY ADOPTED AMENDED VERSION) A. AABC (NSTSB) - AABC National Standards for Total System Balance B. ASHRAE Std 111 - Measurement, Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing of Building HVAC Systems. C. NEBB (TAB) - Procedural Standards for Testing Adjusting and Balancing of Environmental Systems;. D. SMACNA (TAB) - HVAC Systems Testing, Adjusting and Balancing;. 1.04 SUBMITTALS A. Installer Qualifications:  Submit name of adjusting and balancing agency and TAB supervisor for approval within 30 days after award of Contract. B. TAB Plan: Submit a written plan indicating the testing, adjusting, and balancing standard to be followed and the specific approach for each system and component. 1. Submit to Architect. 2. Submit to the Commissioning Authority. 3. Submit to Engineer of Record. 4. Submit six weeks prior to starting the testing, adjusting, and balancing work. 5. Include certification that the plan developer has reviewed the contract documents, the equipment and systems, and the control system with the Architect and other installers to sufficiently understand the design intent for each system. 6. Include at least the following in the plan: a. Preface:  An explanation of the intended use of the control system. b. List of all air flow, water flow, sound level, system capacity and efficiency measurements to be performed and a description of specific test procedures, parameters, formulas to be used. c. Copy of field checkout sheets and logs to be used, listing each piece of equipment to be tested, adjusted and balanced with the data cells to be gathered for each. d. Identification and types of measurement instruments to be used and their most recent calibration date. University of Connecticut TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR HVAC 23 0593 - 2 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 e. Discussion of what notations and markings will be made on the duct and piping drawings during the process. f. Final test report forms to be used. g. Detailed step-by-step procedures for TAB work for each system and issue, including: h. Terminal flow calibration (for each terminal type). i. Diffuser proportioning. j. Branch/submain proportioning. k. Total flow calculations. l. Rechecking. 7. Diversity issues. a. Criteria for using air flow straighteners or relocating flow stations and sensors; analogous explanations for the water side. b. Details of how TOTAL flow will be determined; for example: c. Air:  Sum of terminal flows via control system calibrated readings or via hood readings of all terminals, supply (SA) and return air (RA) pitot traverse, SA or RA flow stations. C. Water: Pump curves, circuit setter, flow station, ultrasonic, etc. a. Specific procedures that will ensure that both air and water side are operating at the lowest possible pressures and methods to verify this. b. Confirmation of understanding of the outside air ventilation criteria under all conditions. c. Method of verifying and setting minimum outside air flow rate will be verified and set and for what level (total building, zone, etc.). d. Method of checking building static and exhaust fan and/or relief damper capacity. e. Methods for making coil or other system plant capacity measurements, if specified. f. Time schedule for TAB work to be done in phases (by floor, etc.). g. Description of TAB work for areas to be built out later, if any. h. Time schedule for deferred or seasonal TAB work, if specified. i. False loading of systems to complete TAB work, if specified. j. Exhaust fan balancing and capacity verifications, including any required room pressure differentials. k. Interstitial cavity differential pressure measurements and calculations, if specified. l. differential pressure measurements and calculations between the building and its exterior. m. Procedures for field technician logs of discrepancies, deficient or uncompleted work by others, contract interpretation requests and lists of completed tests (scope and frequency). n. Procedures for formal progress reports, including scope and frequency. o. Procedures for formal deficiency reports, including scope, frequency and distribution. University of Connecticut TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR HVAC 23 0593 - 3 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 D. Control System Coordination Reports:  Communicate in writing to the controls installer all setpoint and parameter changes made or problems and discrepancies identified during TAB that affect, or could affect, the control system setup and operation. E. Final Report:  Indicate deficiencies in systems that would prevent proper testing, adjusting, and balancing of systems and equipment to achieve specified performance. 1. Submit under provisions of Division 01 – General Conditions. 2. Submit to the Commissioning Authority within two weeks after completion of testing, adjusting, and balancing. 3. Revise TAB plan to reflect actual procedures and submit as part of final report. 4. Submit draft copies of report for review prior to final acceptance of Project.  Provide final copies for Architect and Engineer of Record and for inclusion in operating and maintenance manuals. 5. Provide reports in soft cover, letter size, 3-ring binder manuals, complete with index page and indexing tabs, with cover identification at front and side.  Include set of reduced drawings with air outlets and equipment identified to correspond with data sheets, and indicating thermostat locations. 6. Include actual instrument list, with manufacturer name, serial number, and date of calibration. 7. Form of Test Reports: Where the TAB standard being followed recommends a report format use that; otherwise, follow ASHRAE Std 111. 8. Units of Measure:  Report data in both I-P (inch-pound)  units. 9. Include the following on the title page of each report: a. Name of Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing Agency. b. Address of Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing Agency. c. Telephone number of Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing Agency. d. Project name. e. Project location. f. Project Architect. g. Project Engineer. h. Project Contractor. i. Project altitude. j. Report date. F. Project Record Documents:  Record actual locations of flow measuring stations and balancing valves and rough setting. PART 2 PRODUCTS - NOT USED PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS A. Perform total system balance in accordance with one of the following: 1. AABC (NSTSB), AABC National Standards for Total System Balance. 2. ASHRAE Std 111, Practices for Measurement, Testing, Adjusting and Balancing of Building Heating, Ventilation, Air-Conditioning, and Refrigeration Systems. 3. NEBB Procedural Standards for Testing Adjusting Balancing of Environmental Systems. 4. SMACNA (TAB)Maintain at least one copy of the standard to be used at project site at all times. University of Connecticut TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR HVAC 23 0593 - 4 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 B. Begin work after completion of systems to be tested, adjusted, or balanced and complete work prior to Substantial Completion of the project. C. Where HVAC systems and/or components interface with life safety systems, including fire and smoke detection, alarm, and control, coordinate scheduling and testing and inspection procedures with the authorities having jurisdiction. D. TAB Agency Qualifications: 1. Company specializing in the testing, adjusting, and balancing of systems specified in this section. 2. Having minimum of three years documented experience. 3. Certified by one of the following: a. AABC, Associated Air Balance Council completion submit AABC National Performance Guaranty. b. NEBB, National Environmental Balancing Bureau c. TABB, The Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing Bureau of National Energy Management Institute E. TAB Supervisor and Technician Qualifications:  Certified by same organization as TAB agency. 3.02 EXAMINATION A. Verify that systems are complete and operable before commencing work.  Ensure the following conditions: 1. Systems are started and operating in a safe and normal condition. 2. Temperature control systems are installed complete and operable. 3. Proper thermal overload protection is in place for electrical equipment. 4. Final filters are clean and in place.  If required, install temporary media in addition to final filters. 5. Duct systems are clean of debris. 6. Fans are rotating correctly. 7. Fire and volume dampers are in place and open. 8. Air coil fins are cleaned and combed. 9. Access doors are closed and duct end caps are in place. 10. Air outlets are installed and connected. 11. Duct system leakage is minimized. 12. Hydronic systems are flushed, filled, and vented. 13. Pumps and fans are rotating correctly. 14. Proper strainer baskets are clean and in place. 15. Service and balance valves are open. 3.03 PREPARATION A. Hold a pre-balancing meeting at least one week prior to starting TAB work. 1. Require attendance by all installers and control providers whose work will be tested, adjusted, or balanced. 3.04 ADJUSTMENT TOLERANCES A. Air Handling Systems:  Adjust to within plus or minus 10 percent of design for supply systems and plus or minus 10 percent of design for return and exhaust systems. University of Connecticut TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR HVAC 23 0593 - 5 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 B. Air Outlets and Inlets: Adjust total to within plus 10 percent and minus 5 percent of design to space.  Adjust outlets and inlets in space to within plus or minus 10 percent of design. C. Hydronic Systems:  Adjust to within plus or minus 10 percent of design. 3.05 RECORDING AND ADJUSTING A. Field Logs:  Maintain written logs including: 1. Running log of events and issues. 2. Discrepancies, deficient or uncompleted work by others. 3. Contract interpretation requests. 4. Lists of completed tests. B. Ensure recorded data represents actual measured or observed conditions. C. Permanently mark settings of valves, dampers, and other adjustment devices allowing settings to be restored. Set and lock memory stops. D. Mark on the drawings the locations where traverse and other critical measurements were taken and cross reference the location in the final report. E. After adjustment, take measurements to verify balance has not been disrupted or that such disruption has been rectified. F. Leave systems in proper working order, replacing belt guards, closing access doors, closing doors to electrical switch boxes, and restoring thermostats to specified settings. G. At final inspection, recheck random selections of data recorded in report.  Recheck points or areas as selected and witnessed by the Owner. H. Check and adjust systems approximately two seasons after final acceptance and submit report. 3.06 AIR SYSTEM PROCEDURE A. Work with Control vendor to establish minimum setpoints necessary to satisfy contract documents.  Iterative testing to determine these minimum setpoints will be expected to be in the submittals. B. Adjust air handling and distribution systems to provide required or design supply, return, and exhaust air quantities at site altitude. C. Make air quantity measurements in ducts by Pitot tube traverse of entire cross sectional area of duct. D. Measure air quantities at air inlets and outlets. E. Adjust distribution system to obtain uniform space temperatures free from objectionable drafts and noise. F. Use volume control devices to regulate air quantities only to extend that adjustments do not create objectionable air motion or sound levels.  Effect volume control by duct internal devices such as dampers and splitters. G. Vary total system air quantities by adjustment of fan speeds.  Provide drive changes required.  Vary branch air quantities by damper regulation. H. Measure static air pressure conditions on air supply units, including filter and coil pressure drops, and total pressure across the fan.  Make allowances for 50 percent loading of filters. University of Connecticut TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR HVAC 23 0593 - 6 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 I. Adjust outside air automatic dampers, outside air, return air, and exhaust dampers for design conditions. J. Measure temperature conditions across outside air, return air, and exhaust dampers to check leakage. K. Where modulating dampers are provided, take measurements and balance at extreme conditions.  Balance variable volume systems at maximum air flow rate, full cooling, and at minimum air flow rate, full heating. L. For variable air volume system powered units set volume controller to air flow setting indicated.  Confirm connections properly made and confirm proper operation for automatic variable air volume temperature control. 3.07 WATER SYSTEM PROCEDURE A. Work with Control vendor to establish minimum setpoints necessary to satisfy contract documents.  Iterative testing to determine these minimum setpoints will be expected in the submittals. B. Adjust water systems to provide required or design quantities. C. Use calibrated Venturi tubes, orifices, or other metered fittings and pressure gages to determine flow rates for system balance.  Where flow metering devices are not installed, base flow balance on temperature difference across various heat transfer elements in the system. D. Adjust systems to provide specified pressure drops and flows through heat transfer elements prior to thermal testing.  Perform balancing by measurement of temperature differential in conjunction with air balancing. E. Effect system balance with automatic control valves fully open to heat transfer elements. F. Effect adjustment of water distribution systems by means of balancing cocks, valves, and fittings. Do not use service or shut-off valves for balancing unless indexed for balance point. G. Where available pump capacity is less than total flow requirements or individual system parts, full flow in one part may be simulated by temporary restriction of flow to other parts. 3.08 COMMISSIONING A. See Division 01  General Requirements for additional requirements. 3.09 SCOPE A. Test, adjust, and balance the following: 1. Plumbing Pumps. 2. HVAC Pumps. 3. Air Coils. 4. Terminal Heat Transfer Units. 5. Air Handling Units. 6. Rooftop Units. 7. Dedicated Outdoor Air Units. 8. Dehumidification Air Handling Units 9. Fans. University of Connecticut TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR HVAC Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 10. Air Filters. 11. Fan Coil Units. 12. Air Terminal Units. (Including but not limited to VAV boxes) 13. Cabinet Unit Heaters. 14. Unit Heaters. 15. Radiant Panels. 16. Radiators. 17. Panel Radiators. 18. Air Inlets and Outlets. 19. Heat Exchangers. 20. Split System Heat Pumps. 21. Variable Refrigerant Flow (VRF) units. 3.10 MINIMUM DATA TO BE REPORTED A. Electric Motors: 1. Manufacturer. 2. Model/Frame. 3. HP/BHP. 4. Phase, voltage, amperage; nameplate, actual, no load. 5. RPM. 6. Service factor. 7. Starter size, rating, heater elements. 8. Sheave Make/Size/Bore. 9. VFD Setpoints. 10. ECM Setpomts. B. V-Belt Drives: 1. Identification/location. 2. Required driven RPM. 3. Driven sheave, diameter and RPM. 4. Belt, size and quantity. 5. Motor sheave diameter and RPM. 6. Center to center distance, maximum, minimum, and actual. C. Cooling Coils: 1. Identification/number. 2. Location. 3. Service. 4. Manufacturer. 5. Air flow, design and actual. 6. Entering air DB temperature, design and actual. 7. Entering air WB temperature, design and actual. 8. Leaving air DB temperature, design and actual. 9. Leaving air WB temperature, design and actual. 10. Water flow, design and actual. 11. Water pressure drop, design and actual. 12. Entering water temperature, design and actual. 13. Leaving water temperature, design and actual. 23 0593 - 7 University of Connecticut TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR HVAC Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 14. Saturated suction temperature, design and actual. 15. Air pressure drop, design and actual. D. Heating Coils: 1. Identification/number. 2. Location. 3. Service. 4. Manufacturer. 5. Air flow, design and actual. 6. Water flow, design and actual. 7. Water pressure drop, design and actual. 8. Entering water temperature, design and actual. 9. Leaving water temperature, design and actual. 10. Entering air temperature, design and actual. 11. Leaving air temperature, design and actual. 12. Air pressure drop, design and actual. E. Air Moving Equipment: 1. Location. 2. Manufacturer. 3. Model number. 4. Serial number. 5. Arrangement/Class/Discharge. 6. Air flow, specified and actual. 7. Return air flow, specified and actual. 8. Outside air flow, specified and actual. 9. Total static pressure (total external), specified and actual. 10. Inlet pressure. 11. Discharge pressure. 12. Sheave Make/Size/Bore. 13. Number of Belts/Make/Size. 14. Fan RPM. F. Return Air/Outside Air: 1. Identification/location. 2. Design air flow. 3. Actual air flow. 4. Design return air flow. 5. Actual return air flow. 6. Design outside air flow. 7. Actual outside air flow. 8. Return air temperature. 9. Outside air temperature. 10. Required mixed air temperature. 11. Actual mixed air temperature. 12. Design outside/return air ratio. 13. Actual outside/return air ratio. G. Exhaust and Supply Fans: 23 0593 - 8 University of Connecticut TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR HVAC Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1. Location. 2. Manufacturer. 3. Model number. 4. Serial number. 5. Air flow, specified and actual. 6. Total static pressure (total external), specified and actual. 7. Inlet pressure. 8. Discharge pressure. 9. Sheave Make/Size/Bore. 10. Number of Belts/Make/Size. 11. Fan RPM. H. Duct Traverses: 1. System zone/branch. 2. Duct size. 3. Area. 4. Design velocity. 5. Design air flow. 6. Test velocity. 7. Test air flow. 8. Duct static pressure. 9. Air temperature. 10. Air correction factor. I. Duct Leak Tests: 1. Description of ductwork under test. 2. Duct design operating pressure. 3. Duct design test static pressure. 4. Duct capacity, air flow. 5. Maximum allowable leakage duct capacity times leak factor. 6. Test apparatus: a. Blower. b. Orifice, tube size. c. Orifice size. d. Calibrated. 7. Test static pressure. 8. Test orifice differential pressure. 9. Leakage. J. Air Monitoring Stations: 1. Identification/location. 2. System. 3. Size. 4. Area. 5. Design velocity. 6. Design air flow. 7. Test velocity. 8. Test air flow. 23 0593 - 9 University of Connecticut TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR HVAC Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 K. Flow Measuring Stations: 1. Identification/number. 2. Location. 3. Size. 4. Manufacturer. 5. Model number. 6. Serial number. 7. Design Flow rate. 8. Design pressure drop. 9. Actual/final pressure drop. 10. Actual/final flow rate. 11. Station calibrated setting. L. Terminal Unit Data: 1. Manufacturer. 2. Type, constant, variable, single, dual duct. 3. Identification/number. 4. Location. 5. Model number. 6. Size. 7. Minimum static pressure. 8. Minimum design air flow. 9. Maximum design air flow. 10. Maximum actual air flow. 11. Inlet static pressure. M. Air Distribution Tests: 1. Air terminal number. 2. Room number/location. 3. Terminal type. 4. Terminal size. 5. Area factor. 6. Design velocity. 7. Design air flow. 8. Test (final) velocity. 9. Test (final) air flow. 10. Percent of design air flow. END OF SECTION 23 0593 - 10 University of Connecticut HVAC INSULATION 23 0700 -1 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 SECTION 23 0700 HVAC INSULATION PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. HVAC piping insulation, jackets and accessories. B. HVAC equipment insulation, jackets and accessories. C. HVAC ductwork insulation, jackets, and accessories. 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this section. B. Division 07 – Firestopping C. Division 09-Finishes D. Section 23 0553-Identification of HVAC Piping and Equipment E. Section 23 3100-HVAC ducts and casings F. Section 23 2113 – Hydronic Piping 1.03 REFERENCES STANDARDS (FOLLOW THE MOST CURRENTLY ADOPTED AMENDED VERSION) A. ASTM International: 1. ASTM B209 -Standard Specification for Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Sheet and Plate. 2. ASTM C195 -Standard Specification for Mineral Fiber Thermal Insulating Cement. 3. ASTM C449/C449M -Standard Specification for Mineral Fiber Hydraulic-Setting Thermal Insulating and Finishing Cement. 4. ASTM C450 -Standard Practice for Fabrication of Thermal Insulating Fitting Covers for NPS Piping, and Vessel Lagging. 5. ASTM C533 -Standard Specification for Calcium Silicate Block and Pipe Thermal Insulation. 6. ASTM C534 -Standard Specification for Preformed Flexible Elastomeric Cellular Thermal Insulation in Sheet and Tubular Form. 7. ASTM C547 -Standard Specification for Mineral Fiber Pipe Insulation. 8. ASTM C553 -Standard Specification for Mineral Fiber Blanket Thermal Insulation for Commercial and Industrial Applications. 9. ASTM C578 -Standard Specification for Rigid, Cellular Polystyrene Thermal Insulation. 10. ASTM C585 -Standard Practice for Inner and Outer Diameters of Rigid Thermal Insulation for Nominal Sizes of Pipe and Tubing (NPS System). 11. ASTM C591 -Standard Specification for Unfaced Preformed Rigid Cellular Polyisocyanurate Thermal Insulation. 12. ASTM C612 -Standard Specification for Mineral Fiber Block and Board Thermal Insulation. 13. ASTM C795 -Standard Specification for Thermal Insulation for Use in Contact with Austenitic Stainless Steel. University of Connecticut HVAC INSULATION 23 0700 -2 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 14. ASTM C921 -Standard Practice for Determining the Properties of Jacketing Materials for Thermal Insulation. 15. ASTM C1071 -Standard Specification for Thermal and Acoustical Insulation (Glass Fiber, Duct Lining Material). 16. ASTM C1136 -Standard Specification for Flexible, Low Permeance Vapor Retarders for Thermal Insulation. 17. ASTM C1290 -Standard Specification for Flexible Fibrous Glass Blanket Insulation Used to Externally Insulate HVAC Ducts. 18. ASTM D1785 -Standard Specification for Rigid Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Compounds and Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC) Compounds. 19. ASTM D4637 -Standard Specification for EPDM Sheet Used in Single-Ply Roof Membrane. 20. ASTM E96/E96M -Standard Test Methods for Water Vapor Transmission of Materials. 21. ASTM E162 -Standard Test Method for Surface Flammability of Materials Using a Radiant Heat Energy Source. B. Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors’: 1. SMACNA -HVAC Duct Construction Standard -Metal and Flexible. C. Underwriters Laboratories Inc.: 1. UL 1978 -Standard for Safety for Grease Ducts. 1.04 SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: Submit product description, thermal characteristics and list of materials and thickness for each service, and location. B. Manufacturer's Instructions: Indicate installation procedures necessary to ensure acceptable workmanship and that installation standards will be achieved. C. Manufacturer's Certificate: Certify products meet or exceed specified requirements. 1.05 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Test pipe insulation for maximum flame spread index of 25 and maximum smoke developed index of not exceeding 50 in accordance with ASTM E84. B. Pipe insulation manufactured in accordance with ASTM C585 for inner and outer diameters. C. Factory fabricated fitting covers manufactured in accordance with ASTM C450. D. Duct insulation, Coverings, and Linings: Maximum 25/50 flame spread/smoke developed index, when tested in accordance with ASTM E84, using specimen procedures and mounting procedures of ASTM E 2231. E. Manufacturer Qualifications: Company specializing in manufacturing products of the type specified in this section with not less than three years of documented experience. F. Applicator Qualifications: Company specializing in performing the type of work specified in this section, with minimum three years of experience and approved by manufacturer. 1.06 PRE-INSTALLATION MEETINGS A. Convene minimum one week prior to commencing work of this section. 1.07 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING University of Connecticut HVAC INSULATION 23 0700 -3 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 A. Accept materials on site, labeled with manufacturer's identification, product density, and thickness. B. Protect insulation from weather and construction traffic, dirt, water, chemical, and mechanical damage, by storing in original wrapping. Store all insulation materials in a clean, dry environment. 1.08 FIELD CONDITIONS A. Maintain ambient conditions required by manufacturers of each product. B. Maintain temperature before, during, and after installation for minimum of 24 hours. 1.09 FIELD MEASUREMENTS A. Verify field measurements prior to fabrication. 1.10 SCHEDULING A. Schedule insulation application after pressure and leak testing systems and, where required, after installing and testing heat tracing. Insulation application may begin on segments that have satisfactory test results. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS A. Surface Burning Characteristics: For insulation and related materials, as determined by testing identical products according to ASTM E 84, by a testing agency acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction. Factory label insulation and jacket materials and adhesive, mastic, tapes, and cement material containers, with appropriate markings of applicable testing agency. 1. Insulation Installed Indoors: Flame-spread index of 25 or less, and smoke-developed index of 50 or less. 2. Insulation Installed Outdoors: Flame-spread index of 75 or less, and smoke-developed index of 150 or less. 2.02 MANUFACTURER A. Manufacturers for Flexible Glass Fiber (FGF), Pre-Molded Glass Fiber (PGF) and Rigid Glass Fiber (RGF) Insulation Products: 1. Knauf Insulation 2. Johns Manville Corporation 3. Owens-Corning. 4. Substitutions: Division 01. B. Manufacturers for Closed Cell Elastomeric (CCE) Insulation Products: 1. Aeroflex. USA, Inc. 2. Armacell, LLC (Interior-ArmaFlex, Exterior-ArmaTuff) 3. K-Flex USA LLC 4. Substitutions: Division 01. C. Manufacturers for Polyisocyanurate Foam Insulation Products: (steam only) 1. Dow Chemical Company. 2. Owens-Corning 3. Johns Manville Corporation 4. Substitutions: Division 01. D. Manufacturers for Fire Rated (FR) Insulation Products: University of Connecticut HVAC INSULATION 23 0700 -4 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1. 3M Fire Barrier Duct Wrap 615+. 2. Morgan Theramal Ceramics Pyroscat DuctWrap XL. 3. Unifrax FyreWrap Elite 1.5. 4. Substitutions: Division 01. E. Manufacturers for Jacketing (PVC): 1. Johns Manville 2. P.I.C. Plastics Inc. 3. Proto Corporation 4. Substitutions: Division 01. F. Manufacturers for Jacketing (ALM): 1. Childers Brand 2. ITW Insulation Systems 3. RPR Products 4. Substitutions: Division 01. G. Manufacturers for exterior pipe/ duct waterproof jacketing (WJ): 1. Polyguard Products, Inc.; Alumaguard 60. 2. Venture Tape Corporation; VentureClad Plus. 3. MFM Building Products Corp: Flex Clad 400 4. Substitutions: Division 01. 2.03 PIPE INSULATION A. Pre-Molded Glass Fiber (PGF) Insulation: 1. ASTM C547 and ASTM C795, rigid molded, noncombustible. 2. 'K' ('Ksi') Value: ASTM C177, 0.24 at 75°F. 3. Maximum Service Temperature: 850°F. 4. Maximum Moisture Absorption: 0.2 percent by volume. 5. Vapor Barrier Jacket: White kraft paper with glass fiber yarn, bonded to aluminized film; self-sealing lap, moisture vapor transmission when tested in accordance with ASTM E96/E96M of 0.02 perm-inches (ASJ-SSL). B. Closed Cell Elastomeric (CCE) Insulation: 1. Preformed flexible elastomeric cellular rubber insulation complying with ASTM C534/C534M Grade 3; use molded tubular material wherever possible. 2. Minimum Service Temperature: Minus 40°F. 3. Maximum Service Temperature: 220°F. 4. Connection: Waterproof vapor barrier adhesive. 2.04 PIPE INSULATION JACKETS A. Polyvinyl-chloride (PVC): Plastic Pipe Jacket. 1. Product Description: ASTM D1785, One piece molded type fitting covers and sheet material, off-white color. 2. Thickness: 10 mil. 3. Connections: Brush on welding adhesive. University of Connecticut HVAC INSULATION 23 0700 -5 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 B. Aluminum (ALM): Self-Adhesive Waterproofing Jacket. Minimum 12 mil thick, vapor barrier and waterproofing membrane for installation over insulation located aboveground outdoors; UV resistant, zero permeability with textured aluminum-foil facing, impact and tear resistant. 2.05 PIPE INSULATION ACCESSORIES A. Vapor Retarder Lap Adhesive: Compatible with insulation. B. Covering Adhesive Mastic: Compatible with insulation. C. Piping 1-1/2 inches diameter and smaller: Galvanized steel insulation protection shield. MSS SP-69, Type 40. Length: Based on pipe size and insulation thickness. D. Piping 2 inches diameter and larger: hydrous calcium silicate. Inserts length: not less than 6 inches long, matching thickness and contour of adjoining insulation. E. Closed Cell Elastomeric Insulation Pipe Hanger: Polyurethane insert with aluminum single piece construction with self-adhesive closure. Thickness to match pipe insulation. F. Valve insulation Wraps: White, noncombustible, conforming to ASTM E 84. Match insulation thickness to pipe size. Valve covers shall be easily removable. 2.06 EQUIPMENT INSULATION A. Closed Cell Elastomeric (CCE) Insulation: 1. Preformed flexible elastomeric cellular rubber insulation complying with ASTM C534/C534M Grade 3, in sheet form. 2. Minimum Service Temperature: -40°F. 3. Maximum Service Temperature: 220°F. 4. Connection: Waterproof vapor barrier adhesive. B. PVC Plastic Equipment Jacket: 1. Product Description: ASTM D1785, sheet material, off-white color. 2. Minimum Service Temperature: -40°F. 3. Maximum Service Temperature: 150°F. 4. Water Vapor Permeance: ASTM E96/E96M; 0.02 perms. 5. Thickness: 10 mil. 6. Connections: Pressure sensitive color matching vinyl tape. C. Aluminum Equipment Jacket: 1. ASTM B209 2. Thickness: 0.020 inch thick sheet. 3. Finish: Smooth. 4. Joining: Longitudinal slip joints and 2 inch laps. 5. Fittings: 0.02 inch thick die shaped fitting covers with factory attached protective liner. 6. Metal Jacket Bands: 3/8 inch wide; 0.02 inch thick aluminum. 2.07 EQUIPMENT INSULATION ACCESSORIES A. Vapor Retarder Lap Adhesive: Compatible with insulation. B. Covering Adhesive Mastic: Compatible with insulation. C. Tie Wire: 0.048 inch stainless steel with twisted ends on maximum 12 inch centers. University of Connecticut HVAC INSULATION 23 0700 -6 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 D. Mineral Fiber Hydraulic-Setting Thermal Insulating and Finishing Cement: ASTM C449/C449M. E. Adhesives: Compatible with insulation. Refer to manufacturers’ installation manual. 2.08 DUCTWORK INSULATION A. Flexible Glass Fiber (FGF) Insulation: ASTM C553 Type I, II, or III, ASTM C1290 Type III, in accordance to NFPA 90A and NFPA 90B for duct coverings, with ASTM C1136 foil scrim kraft (FSK). 1. Thermal performance: 1.0 lb/ft3, 7.4 ft2 hr °F/btu minimum R-value for 2” thick at 75°F mean temperature per ASTM C177 and ASTM C518. 2. Operating temperature range: 40°F to 250°F. 3. Water vapor permeance: 0.02 perms maximum per ASTM E96. 4. Water vapor sorption: 5% by weight maximum per ASTM C1104. 5. Corrosiveness: Does not accelerate per ASTM C665. 6. Fungi growth: No fungi growth per ASTM C1338. B. Rigid Glass Fiber (RGF) Insulation: Glass fiber board, ASTM C 612 Type 1A or 1B, in accordance to NFPA 90A and NFPA 90B for duct coverings, with ASTM C 1136 foil scrim kraft (FSK). 1. Thermal performance: 8.7 ft2 hr °F/btu minimum R-value for 2” thick at 75°F mean temperature per ASTM C177 and ASTM C518. 2. Operating temperature range: 0°F to 450°F. 3. Water vapor permeance: 0.02 perms maximum per ASTM E96. 4. Water vapor sorption: 5% by weight maximum per ASTM C1104. 5. Corrosiveness: Does not accelerate per ASTM C665. 6. Fungi growth: No fungi growth per ASTM C1338. C. Closed Cell Elastomertic (CCE) Insulation: 1. Thermal performance: 8.0 ft2 hr °F/btu minimum R-value for 2” thick at 75°F mean temperature per ASTM C177 and ASTM C518. 2. Operating temperature range: -40°F to 220°F. 3. Water absorption: 0.2% by volume per ASTM C 209 or ASTM C1763. 4. Water vapor permeability: 0.08 perm-in per ASTM E 96. 5. Ultraviolet (UV) resistance: Excellent per ASTM G 53 or ASTM G 90. 6. Weatherability: Excellent per ASTM D 471. D. Fire Rated (FR) Insulation: 1. Inorganic blanket encapsulated with scrim reinforced foil meeting UL 1978 2. Thermal Conductivity: 0.42 at 500°F. 3. Weight: 1.4 pound per square foot. 4. Surface Burning Characteristics: Maximum 0/0 flame spread/smoke developed index when tested in accordance with ASTM E84. E. Technical Data: 1. Insulation shall pass when tested in accordance with the following: a. Non-combustibility per ASTM E136. b. Fire resistance (wall) per ASTM E119. c. Durability test per ASTM C518. d. Internal fire test per ASTM E2336. e. Fire engulfment (duct) per ASTM E814. University of Connecticut HVAC INSULATION 23 0700 -7 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 f. ULC grease duct test protocol. g. Grease duct clearances per UL1978. h. Air duct ventilation enclosure per ISO6944. 2. Thermal performance: 6.3 ft2 hr °F/btu minimum R-value for 1-1/2” thick at 75°F mean temperature per ASTM C177 and ASTM C518. 2.09 DUCTWORK JACKETS A. Aluminum (ALM): Self-Adhesive Waterproofing Jacket: Minimum 12 mil thick, vapor barrier and waterproofing membrane for installation over insulation located aboveground outdoors; UV resistant, zero permeability with textured aluminum-foil facing, impact and tear resistant. 2.10 DUCTWORK INSULATION ACCESSORIES A. Vapor Retarder Tape: 1. Kraft paper reinforced with glass fiber yarn and bonded to aluminized film, with pressure sensitive rubber based adhesive. B. Vapor Retarder Lap Adhesive: Compatible with insulation. C. Adhesive: Waterproof, ASTM E162 fire-retardant type. D. Liner Fasteners: Galvanized steel, self-adhesive pad with head. E. Tie Wire: 0.048 inch stainless steel with twisted ends on maximum 12 inch centers. F. Lagging Adhesive: Fire retardant type with maximum 25/450 flame spread/smoke developed index when tested in accordance with ASTM E84. G. Impale Anchors: Galvanized steel, 12 gage self-adhesive pad. H. Adhesives: Compatible with insulation. I. Membrane Adhesives: As recommended by membrane manufacturer. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 EXAMINATION A. Protect insulation from exposure to moisture prior to and after installation. All insulation other than flexible elastomeric that becomes wet shall be replaced at no cost to the project. B. Verify piping, equipment and ductwork has been tested before applying insulation materials. C. Verify piping, equipment and ductwork surfaces are clean and dry, with foreign material removed. 3.02 INSTALLATION -PIPING SYSTEMS A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Install in accordance with NAIMA National Insulation Standards. C. Piping Exposed to View in Finished Spaces Provide with PVC Plastic pipe jacketing for additional protection. Locate insulation and cover seams in least visible locations. D. Piping Exposed to view in mechanical spaces. Provide with PVC Plastic pipe jacketing for additional protection. Locate insulation and cover seams in least visible locations. E. Continue insulation through penetrations of building assemblies or portions of assemblies having fire resistance rating of one hour or less. Provide intumescent University of Connecticut HVAC INSULATION 23 0700 -8 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 firestopping when continuing insulation through assembly. Finish at supports, protrusions, and interruptions. Refer to Section 07 for penetrations of assemblies with fire resistance rating greater than one hour. F. Piping Systems Conveying Fluids Below Ambient Temperature: 1. Insulate entire system including fittings, valves, unions, flanges, strainers, flexible connections, pump bodies, and expansion joints. 2. Furnish factory-applied or field-applied vapor retarder jackets. Secure factory-applied jackets with pressure sensitive adhesive self-sealing longitudinal laps and butt strips. Secure field-applied jackets with outward clinch expanding staples and seal staple penetrations with vapor retarder mastic. 3. Insulate fittings, joints, and valves with molded insulation of like material and thickness as adjacent pipe. Finish with glass cloth and vapor retarder adhesive or PVC fitting covers. G. For all hot piping conveying fluids, insulate flanges and unions at equipment. H. Glass fiber insulated pipes conveying fluids above ambient temperature. 1. Provide standard jackets, with or without vapor barrier, factory-applied or field-applied. Secure with self-sealing longitudinal laps and butt strips with pressure sensitive adhesive. Secure with outward clinch expanding staples. 2. Insulate fittings, joints, and valves with insulation of like material and thickness as adjoining pipe. Finish with glass cloth and adhesive or PVC fitting covers. I. Inserts and Shields: 1. Application: Piping 1-1/2 inches diameter or larger. 2. Shields: Galvanized steel between pipe hangers or pipe hanger rolls and inserts. 3. Insert location: Between support shield and piping and under the finish jacket. 4. Insert Configuration: Minimum 6 inches long, of same thickness and contour as adjoining insulation; may be factory fabricated. 5. Insert Material: Hydrous calcium silicate insulation or other heavy density insulating material suitable for the planned temperature range. J. Insulation Terminating Points: 1. Coil Branch Piping 1 inch and Smaller: Terminate hot water piping at union upstream of the coil control valve. 2. Chilled Water Coil Branch Piping: Insulate chilled water piping and associated components up to coil connection. 3. Condensate Piping: Insulate entire piping system and components to prevent condensation. K. Closed Cell Elastomeric Insulation: 1. Push insulation on to piping. 2. Miter joints at elbows. 3. Seal seams and butt joints with manufacturer’s recommended adhesive. 4. When application requires multiple layers, apply with joints staggered. 5. Insulate fittings and valves with insulation of like material and thickness as adjacent pipe. L. Closed Cell Elastomeric Insulation Pipe Hanger: 1. Install insulated pipe hangers at support locations. 2. Pipe clamps to be installed over insulation not directly to piping. University of Connecticut HVAC INSULATION 23 0700 -9 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 M. Exterior Applications: Provide vapor barrier jacket. Insulate fittings, joints, and valves with insulation of like material and thickness as adjoining pipe, and finish with glass mesh reinforced vapor barrier cement. Cover with aluminum jacket with seams located on bottom side of horizontal piping. N. Buried Piping: Provide factory fabricated assembly with inner all-purpose service jacket with self-sealing lap, and asphalt impregnated open mesh glass fabric, with one mil thick aluminum foil sandwiched between three layers of bituminous compound; outer surface faced with a polyester film. O. Heat Traced Piping: Insulate fittings, joints, and valves with insulation of like material, thickness, and finish as adjoining pipe. Size large enough to enclose pipe and heat tracer. Cover with aluminum jacket with seams located on bottom side of horizontal piping. P. Install valve bags on all chilled water valves unless otherwise indicated. Valve bags shall be easily removable for servicing of valves. Q. Prepare pipe insulation for finish painting. Refer to Division 09. 3.03 INSTALLATION -EQUIPMENT A. Factory Insulated Equipment: Do not insulate. B. Exposed Equipment: Locate insulation and cover seams in least visible locations. C. Fill joints, cracks, seams, and depressions with bedding compound to form smooth surface. On cold equipment, use vapor retarder cement. D. Equipment Containing Fluids Below Ambient Temperature: 1. Insulate entire equipment surfaces. 2. Apply insulation close to equipment by grooving, scoring, and beveling insulation. Fasten insulation to equipment with studs, pins, clips, adhesive, wires, or bands. 3. Furnish factory-applied or field-applied vapor retarder jackets. Secure factory-applied jackets with pressure sensitive adhesive self-sealing longitudinal laps and butt strips. Secure field-applied jackets with outward clinch expanding staples and seal staple penetrations with vapor retarder mastic. 4. Finish insulation at supports, protrusions, and interruptions. E. Equipment Containing all Fluids Above Ambient Temperature: 1. Insulate flanges and unions with removable sections and jackets. 2. Install insulation with factory-applied or field applied jackets, with or without vapor barrier. Finish with glass cloth and adhesive. 3. Finish insulation at supports, protrusions, and interruptions. F. Nameplates and ASME Stamps: Bevel and seal insulation around; do not cover with insulation. G. Equipment Requiring Access for Maintenance, Repair, or Cleaning: Install insulation for easy removal and replacement without damage. 3.04 INSTALLATION -DUCTWORK SYSTEMS A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Install in accordance with NAIMA National Insulation Standards. University of Connecticut HVAC INSULATION 23 0700 -10 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 C. Protect insulation from exposure to moisture prior to and after installation. All insulation other than flexible elastomeric that becomes wet shall be replaced at no cost to the project. D. Duct dimensions indicated on Drawings are finished inside dimensions. E. Insulated ductwork conveying air below ambient temperature: 1. Provide insulation with vapor retarder jackets. 2. Finish with tape and vapor retarder jacket. 3. Continue insulation through walls, sleeves, hangers, and other duct penetrations. 4. Insulate entire system including fittings, joints, flanges, fire dampers, flexible connections, and expansion joints. F. Insulated ductwork conveying air above ambient temperature: 1. Provide with or without standard vapor retarder jacket. 2. Insulate fittings and joints. Where service access is required, bevel and seal ends of insulation. G. External Elastomeric Duct Insulation: 1. Adhere to clean oil-free surfaces with full coverage of adhesive. 2. Seal seams and butt joints with manufacturer’s recommended adhesive. 3. When application requires multiple layers, apply with joints staggered. 4. Insulate standing metal duct seams with insulation of like material and thickness as adjacent duct surface. Apply adhesive at joints with flat duct surfaces. 5. Lift ductwork off trapeze hangers and insert spacers. H. Ducts Exterior to Building: 1. Install insulation according to external duct insulation paragraph above. 2. Provide external insulation with vapor retarder jacket. Cover with outdoor jacket finished with caulked aluminum jacket with seams located on bottom side of horizontal duct section. 3. Finish with aluminum duct jacket. 4. Calk seams at flanges and joints. Located major longitudinal seams on bottom side of horizontal duct sections. I. Duct Acoustical Liner 1. Ductwork shall still be insulated per this specification even if the ductwork is acoustically lined. Acoustically lined ductwork does not negate the use of wrap as insulation. J. Prepare duct insulation for finish painting. Refer to Division 09. 3.05 SCHEDULES A. Ductwork Schedules 1. Items Not Insulated: a. Fibrous-glass ducts. b. Factory-insulated flexible ducts. c. Factory-insulated plenums and casings. d. Vibration-control devices. e. Factory-insulated access panels and doors. f. Exhaust not connected to energy recovery system (unless indicated within tables below) University of Connecticut HVAC INSULATION 23 0700 -11 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2. Provide insulation materials and thicknesses identified below. If more than one material is listed for a duct location, selection from materials listed is Division 23 option. Heating and Cooling Supply and Heat/ Energy Recovery System Exhaust and Return Ducts Climate Zone 5  Description  Minimum As-Installed R-Value  Insulation Type  Minimum Thickness (inches)  Jacketing  Exterior to building envelope  R-12.0  Closed Cell Elastomeric (CCE)  3.0  ALM  Concealed within thermal envelope of building  R-6.0  Flexible Glass Fiber (FGF)  2.0  FSK  Exposed in mechanical room  R-6.0  Rigid Glass Fiber (RGF)  2.0  FSK  Unconditioned Outside Air Intake Ducts and Exhaust/Relief Duct Inside Building Envelope Climate Zones 5  Description  Minimum As-Installed R-Value  Insulation Type  Minimum Thickness (inches)  Jacketing  For outside air intakes, all ductwork between the building envelope and the first system heating coil, cooling coil or air handling unit connection.  R-12.0  Flexible Glass Fiber (FGF)  3.0  FSK  Rigid Glass Fiber (RGF)  3.0  FSK  University of Connecticut HVAC INSULATION 23 0700 -12 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 For exhaust/relief ducts, all ductwork between the building envelope and first system isolation damper.  R-12.0  Flexible Glass Fiber (FGF)  3.0  FSK  Rigid Glass Fiber (RGF)  3.0  FSK  Shower Exhaust Ducts Climate Zones 5  Description  Minimum As-Installed R-Value  Insulation Type  Minimum Thickness (inches)  Jacketing  Concealed in unconditioned spaces including shafts, mechanical spaces, non-plenum return ceiling cavities and crawlspaces (ventilated and non-ventilated)  R-3.5  Flexible Glass Fiber (FGF)  1.5  FSK  3.06 DUCT LINER A. See Section 23 3100 -HVAC Ducts and Casings, for duct liner specifications 3.07 PIPE INSULATION SCHEDULE A. Provide insulation materials and thicknesses scheduled for each system type and pressure/temperature range. If more than one material is listed for a system, selection from materials listed is Division 23 option. B. For dual temperature systems (heating and cooling), provide thickness equal to greater of heating or cooling scheduled value. Dual temperature piping shall also meet all vapor barrier requirements for cooling insulation (perm rating). C. Insulation for pre-insulated piping shall meet all specified requirements. D. Insulate piping operating at temperatures below 40°F and systems operating between 40°F to 65°F in accordance with NAIMA Guide to Insulating Chilled Water Piping Systems with Mineral Fiber Pipe Insulation. Comply with all recommendations including but not limited to the requirement for vapor dams every fourth section of insulation. Steam/Steam Condensate Return: Up to 15 PSI and 250°F  Insulation Type  Pipe Size (inch)  Indoor .Minimum Thickness (inch)  Outdoor .Minimum Thickness (inch)  Factory Applied Jacket  Field Applied Jacket  University of Connecticut HVAC INSULATION 23 0700 -13 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 University of Connecticut HVAC INSULATION 23 0700 -14 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 Pre-Molded Glass Fiber (PGF)  Less than 1 to less than 4  2.5  4.0  ASJ-SSL  Indoor: PVC for exposed piping in finished spaces and mechanical rooms. Outdoor: ALM  4 and Larger  3.0  4.0  Heating Hot Water Systems  Insulation Type  Pipe Size (inch)  Indoor .Minimum Thickness (inch)  Outdoor .Minimum Thickness (inch)  Factory Applied Jacket  Field Applied Jacket  Pre-Molded Glass Fiber (PGF)  Less than 1 to 1.5  1.5  3.0  ASJ.SSL  Indoor: PVC for exposed piping finished space and mechanical rooms. Outdoor: ALM  1.5 and Larger  2.0  4.0  Cooling and Glycol Energy Recovery Systems: 40 deg F to 65 deg F Applies to the Following Systems: Chilled Water  Insulation Type  Pipe Size (inch)  Indoor .Minimum Thickness (inch)  Outdoor .Minimum Thickness (inch)  Factory Applied Jacket  Field Applied Jacket  Closed Cell Elastomeric (CCE)  Less than 1 to 1.5  0.5  3.0  N/A  Indoor: PVC for exposed piping finished space and mechanical rooms  Outdoor: ALM  1.5 and Larger  1.0  3.0  Cooling Coil Condensate Piping and Equipment Drain Piping: All  Insulation Type  Pipe Size (inch)  Indoor .Minimum Thickness (inch)  Outdoor .Minimum Thickness (inch)  Factory Applied Jacket  Field Applied Jacket  Closed Cell Elastomeric (CCE)  All Sizes  0.75  2.0  N/A  Indoor (CCE): N/A Outdoor (CCE): ALM  E. EQUIPMENT INSULATION SCHEDULE F. Provide insulation materials and thicknesses scheduled for each system type and pressure/temperature range. If more than one material is listed for a system, selection from materials listed is Division 23 option. END OF SECTION University of Connecticut DIRECT DIGITAL CONTROL SYSTEM FOR HVAC 23 0923 -1 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 SECTION 23 0923 DIRECT-DIGITAL CONTROL SYSTEM FOR HVAC PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SUMMARY A. Section includes control equipment and software. B. Related Sections: 1. Section 23 04 00 – General Conditions for Mechanical Trades 2. Section 23 09 00 -Instrumentation and Control for HVAC: Control system components. 3. Section 23 09 93 -Sequence of Operations for HVAC Controls: Sequences of operation implemented using products specified in this section. 4. Division 26 -Equipment Wiring Connections: Execution requirements for electric connections specified by this section. 1.02 REFERENCES A. American National Standards Institute: 1. ANSI MC85.1 -Terminology for Automatic Control. 1.03 SYSTEM DESCRIPTION A. Provide connection to existing campus wide BMS system to allow for systems to be viewed remotely and on campus wide graphics. Provide all required control panels to make connections. Provide a new head end master controller to house all of the programming and graphics for the project located within the main mechanical room. New head end controller shall tie into existing campus wise BMS system. B. Automatic temperature controls field monitoring and control system using field programmable microprocessor based units. C. Base system on distributed system of fully intelligent, stand-alone controllers, operating in a multi-tasking, multi-user environment on token passing network, with central and remote hardware, software, and interconnecting wire and conduit. D. Provide computer software and hardware, operator input/output devices, control units, local area networks (LAN), sensors, control devices, actuators. E. Provide controls for variable air volume terminals, Fans, radiation, reheat coils, unit heaters, fan coils, and Air Handling Units, Dedicated Outdoor Air Units, Dehumidifiers when directly connected to control units. Individual terminal unit control is specified in Section 23 09 00. F. Provide control systems consisting of thermostats, temperature/humidity sensors, CO2 sensors, control valves, dampers and operators, indicating devices, interface equipment and other apparatus and accessories to operate mechanical systems, and to perform functions specified. G. Provide installation and calibration, supervision, adjustments, and fine tuning necessary for complete and fully operational system. 1.04 SUBMITTALS A. Division 01 -Submittal Procedures: Submittal procedures. B. Shop Drawings: Indicate the following: University of Connecticut DIRECT DIGITAL CONTROL SYSTEM FOR HVAC 23 0923 -2 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1. Trunk cable schematic showing programmable control-unit locations and trunk data conductors. 2. Connected data points, including connected control unit and input device. 3. System graphics showing monitored systems, data (connected and calculated) point addresses, and operator notations. 4. System configuration with peripheral devices, batteries, power supplies, diagrams, modems, and interconnections. 5. Description and sequence of operation for operating, user, and application software. 6. Use terminology in submittals conforming to ASME MC85.1. 7. Coordinate submittals with information requested in Section 23 09 93. C. Product Data: Submit data for each system component and software module. D. Manufacturer's Installation Instructions: Submit installation instruction for each control system component. E. Manufacturer's Certificate: Certify products meet or exceed specified requirements. 1.05 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Division 01 -Execution and Closeout Requirements: Requirements for submittals. B. Project Record Documents: Record actual locations of control components, including control units, thermostats, and sensors. 1. Revise shop drawings to reflect actual installation and operating sequences. 2. Submit data specified in "Submittals" in final "Record Documents" form. C. Operation and Maintenance Data: 1. Submit interconnection wiring diagrams complete field installed systems with identified and numbered, system components and devices. 2. Submit keyboard illustrations and step-by-step procedures indexed for each operator function. 3. Submit inspection period, cleaning methods, cleaning materials recommended, and calibration tolerances. 1.06 QUALIFICATIONS A. Manufacturer: Company specializing in manufacturing products specified in this section with minimum three years experience , and with service facilities within 100 miles of Project. B. Installer: Company specializing in performing Work of this section with minimum three years experience approved by manufacturer. 1.07 PRE-INSTALLATION MEETINGS A. Section 01 -Administrative Requirements: Pre-installation meeting. B. Convene minimum one week prior to commencing work of this section. 1.08 FIELD MEASUREMENTS A. Verify field measurements prior to fabrication. 1.09 WARRANTY A. Section 01 -Execution and Closeout Requirements: Product warranties and product bonds. University of Connecticut DIRECT DIGITAL CONTROL SYSTEM FOR HVAC 23 0923 -3 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 B. Furnish five year manufacturer warranty for direct digital controls. 1.10 MAINTENANCE SERVICE A. Section 01 -Execution and Closeout Requirements: Requirements for maintenance service. B. Furnish service and maintenance of control systems for one years from Date of Substantial Completion. C. Furnish complete service of controls systems, including callbacks. Make minimum of 4 complete normal inspections of approximately 4 hours duration in addition to normal service calls to inspect, calibrate, and adjust controls. Submit written report after each inspection. D. Furnish two complete inspections per year, one in each season, to inspect, calibrate, and adjust controls. Submit written report after each inspection. E. Examine unit components monthly. Clean, adjust, and lubricate equipment. F. Include systematic examination, adjustment, and lubrication of unit, and controls checkout and adjustments. Repair or replace parts in accordance with manufacturer's operating and maintenance data. Use parts produced by manufacturer of original equipment. G. Perform work without removing units from service during building normal occupied hours. H. Provide emergency call back service at all hours for this maintenance period. I. Maintain locally, near Place of the Work, adequate stock of parts for replacement or emergency purposes. Have personnel available to ensure fulfillment of this maintenance service, without unreasonable loss of time. J. Perform maintenance work using competent and qualified personnel under supervision and in direct employ of manufacturer or original installer. K. Do not assign or transfer maintenance service to agent or subcontractor without prior written consent of Owner. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 DIRECT DIGITAL CONTROLS A. Manufacturers: 1. Andover Controls, Continuum. 2. Automated Logic Corporation, WebCTRL. 3. Substitutions: Not allowed. 2.02 OPERATOR WORKSTATION A. Manufacturers: 1. Dell Corporation 2. IBM 3. HP 4. Substitutions: Division 01 -Product Requirements. B. Furnish each operator workstation consisting of the following: University of Connecticut DIRECT DIGITAL CONTROL SYSTEM FOR HVAC 23 0923 -4 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 C. Personal Computer: PC compatible with sufficient memory and hard drive storage to support graphics, reports, and communication requirements. Furnish with the following minimum configuration requirements: 1. Processor: Intel i5 4.0 GHz. 2. Hard Drive: 1 TB 3. Memory: 8 Gigabyte DDR4 SDRAM. 4. Drive 1: DVD-RW 5. Wireless: 802.11 bgn + Blueooth 4.0 6. Ports: Required serial, parallel, network communications, USB, and cables for proper system operation. 7. Expansion Slots: 1 used for LAN card, 1 available. 8. LAN Card: EtherNet -RJ45 (100 base-T minimum). 9. Mouse: two-button optical type wireless. 10. Keyboard: 104 key. D. Monitor: Minimum of 24 inch color, flat panel display. E. Operating System: Minimum Windows 10 F. Printer: Furnish each operator workstation with color ink jet printer and associated cables. Printer capable of minimum of 14 pages per minute (PPM) operation and compatible with standard parallel or USB communications or network capable. 2.03 PORTABLE OPERATOR'S TERMINAL A. Manufacturers: 1. Dell Corporation 2. IBM 3. HP 4. Substitutions: Division 01 -Product Requirements. B. Furnish device capable of accessing system data and capable of being connected to any point on system network or connected directly to any controller for programming, set-up, and troubleshooting. Portable Operators Terminal uses Read (Initiate) and Write (Execute) Services as defined in Clauses 15.5 and 15.8, respectively, of ASHRAE Standard 135, to communicate with BACnet objects in internetwork. Objects supported include: Analog input, analog output, analog value, binary input, binary output, binary value, device. C. Furnish notebook-style PC including software and hardware required with minimum requirements: 1. Processor: Intel i5 4.0 GHz. 2. Hard Drive: 1 TB 3. Memory: 8 Gigabyte DDR4 SDRAM. 4. Drive 1: DVD-RW 5. Wireless: 802.11 bgn + Blueooth 4.0 6. Ports: Required serial, parallel, network communications, USB, and cables for proper system operation. 7. Expansion Slots: 1 used for LAN card, 1 available. 8. LAN Card: EtherNet -RJ45 (100 base-T minimum). 9. Mouse: two-button optical type wireless. 10. Keyboard: 104 key. University of Connecticut DIRECT DIGITAL CONTROL SYSTEM FOR HVAC 23 0923 -5 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2.04 CONTROL UNITS A. Units: Modular in design and consisting of processor board with programmable RAM memory, local operator access and display panel, and integral interface equipment. B. Battery Backup: For minimum of 48hours for complete system including RAM without interruption, with automatic battery charger. C. Control Units Functions: 1. Monitor or control each input/output point. 2. Completely independent with hardware clock/calendar and software to maintain control independently. 3. Acquire, process, and transfer information to operator station or other control units on network. 4. Accept, process, and execute commands from other control unit's or devices or operator stations. 5. Access both data base and control functions simultaneously. 6. Record, evaluate, and report changes of state or value occurring among associated points. Continue to perform associated control functions regardless of status of network. 7. Perform in stand-alone mode: a. Start/stop. b. Duty cycling. c. Automatic Temperature Control. d. Demand control via a sliding window, predictive algorithm. e. Event initiated control. f. Calculated point. g. Scanning and alarm processing. h. Full direct digital control. i. Trend logging. j. Global communications. k. Maintenance scheduling. D. Global Communications: 1. Broadcast point data onto network, making information available to other system controls units. 2. Transmit input/output points onto network for use by other control units and use data from other control units. E. Input/output Capability: 1. Discrete/digital input (contact status). 2. Discrete/digital output. 3. Analog input. 4. Analog output. 5. Pulse input (5 pulses/second). 6. Pulse output (0-655 seconds in duration with 0.01-second resolution). F. Monitor, control, or address data points. Include analog inputs, analog outputs, pulse inputs, pulse outputs and discrete inputs/outputs. Furnish control units with minimum 30percent spare capacity. University of Connecticut DIRECT DIGITAL CONTROL SYSTEM FOR HVAC 23 0923 -6 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 G. Point Scanning: Set scan or execution speed of each point to operator selected time from 1 to 250 seconds. H. Upload/Download Capability: Download from or upload to operator station. Upload/Download time for entire control unit database maximum 10 seconds on hard.wired LAN I. Test Mode Operation: Place input/output points in test mode to allow testing and developing of control algorithms on line without disrupting field hardware and controlled environment. In test mode: 1. Inhibit scanning and calculation of input points. Issue manual control to input points (set analog or digital input point to operator determined test value) from workstation. 2. Control output points but change only database state or value; leave external field hardware unchanged. 3. Enable control-actions on output points but change only data base state or value. J. Local display and adjustment panel: Integral to control-unit containing digital display, and numerical keyboard. Display and adjust: 1. Input/output point information and status. 2. Controller set points. 3. Controller tuning constants. 4. Program execution times. 5. High and low limit values. 6. Limit differential. 7. Set/display date and time. 8. Control outputs connected to the network. 9. Automatic control outputs. 10. Perform control unit diagnostic testing. K. Points in "Test" mode. 2.05 LOCAL AREA NETWORKS (LAN): A. Furnish communication between control units over local area network (LAN). B. LAN Capacity: Not less than 60stations or nodes. C. Break in Communication Path: Alarm and automatically initiate LAN reconfiguration. D. LAN Data Speed: Minimum 25Mbps. E. Communication Techniques: Allow interface into network by multiple operation stations and by auto-answer/auto-dial modems. Support communication over telephone lines utilizing modems. F. Transmission Median: Fiber optic or single pair of solid 24 gauge twisted, shielded copper cable. G. Network Support: Time for global point to be received by any station, less than 3 seconds. Furnish automatic reconfiguration when station is added or lost. In event transmission cable is cut, reconfigure two sections with no disruption to system's operation, without operator intervention. 2.06 OPERATING SYSTEM SOFTWARE (ADD TO EXISTING, DESCRIPTION BELOW FOR NEWEQUIPMENT TO BE ADDED TO EXISTING SYSTEM) University of Connecticut DIRECT DIGITAL CONTROL SYSTEM FOR HVAC 23 0923 -7 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 A. Input/output Capability From Operator Station: 1. Request display of current values or status in tabular or graphic format. 2. Command selected equipment to specified state. 3. Initiate logs and reports. 4. Change analog limits. 5. Add, delete, or change points within each control unit or application routine. 6. Change point input/output descriptors, status, alarm descriptors, and unit descriptors. 7. Add new control units to system. 8. Modify and set up maintenance scheduling parameters. 9. Develop, modify, delete or display full range of color graphic displays. 10. Automatically archive select data even when running third party software. 11. Capability to sort and extract data from archived files and to generate custom reports. 12. Support two printer operations. 13. Alarm printer: Print alarms, operator acknowledgments, action messages, system alarms, operator sign-on and sign-off. 14. Data printer: Print reports, page prints, and data base prints. 15. Select daily, weekly or monthly as scheduled frequency to synchronize time and date in digital control units. Accommodate daylight savings time adjustments. 16. Print selected control unit database. B. Operator System Access: Via software password with minimum 30access levels at work station and minimum 3access levels at each control unit. C. Data Base Creation and Support: Use standard procedures for changes. Control unit automatically checks workstation data base files upon connection and verify data base match. Include the following minimum capabilities: 1. Add and delete points. 2. Modify point parameters. 3. Change, add, or delete English language descriptors. 4. Add, modify, or delete alarm limits. 5. Add, modify, or delete points in start/stop programs, trend logs, and other items. 6. Create custom relationship between points. 7. Create or modify DDC loops and parameters. 8. Create or modify override parameters. 9. Add, modify, and delete applications programs. 10. Add, delete, develop, or modify dynamic color graphic displays. D. Dynamic Color Graphic Displays: 1. Utilizes custom symbols or system supported library of symbols. 2. Sixteen (16) colors. 3. Sixty (60) outputs of real-time live dynamic data for each graphic. 4. Dynamic graphic data. 5. 1,000 separate graphic pages. 6. Modify graphic screen refresh rate between 1 and 60 seconds. E. Operator Station: University of Connecticut DIRECT DIGITAL CONTROL SYSTEM FOR HVAC 23 0923 -8 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1. Accept data from LAN as needed without scanning entire network for updated point data. 2. Interrogate LAN for updated point data when requested. 3. Allow operator command of devices. 4. Allow operator to place specific control units in or out of service. 5. Allow parameter editing of control units. 6. Store duplicate data base for every control unit and allow down loading while system is on line. 7. Control or modify specific programs. 8. Develop, store and modify dynamic color graphics. 9. Data archiving of assigned points and support overlay graphing of this data using up to four (4) variables. F. Alarm Processing: 1. Off normal condition: Cause alarm and appropriate message, including time, system, point descriptor, and alarm condition. Select alarm state or value and alarms causing automatic dial-out. 2. Critical alarm or change-of-state: Display message, stored on disk for review and sort, or print. 3. Print on line changeable message, up to 60characters in length, for each alarm point specified. 4. Display alarm reports on video. Display multiple alarms in order of occurrence. 5. Define time delay for equipment start-up or shutdown. 6. Allow unique routing of specific alarms. 7. Operator specifies when alarm requires acknowledgment. 8. Continue to indicate unacknowledged alarms after return to normal. 9. Alarm notification: 10. Print automatically. 11. Display indicating alarm condition. 12. Selectable audible alarm indication. G. Event Processing: Automatically initiate commands, user defined messages, take specific control actions or change control strategy and application programs resulting from event condition. Event condition may be value crossing operator defined limit, change of state, specified state, or alarm occurrence or return to normal. H. Automatic Restart: Automatically start field equipment on restoration of power. Furnish time delay between individual equipment restart and time of day start/stop. I. Messages: 1. Automatically display or print user-defined message subsequent to occurrence of selected events. 2. Compose, change, or delete message. 3. Display or log message at any time. 4. Assign any message to event. J. Reports: 1. Manually requested with time and date. 2. Long term data archiving to hard disk. University of Connecticut DIRECT DIGITAL CONTROL SYSTEM FOR HVAC 23 0923 -9 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 3. Automatic directives to download to transportable media including floppy diskettes for storage. 4. Data selection methods to include data base search and manipulation. 5. Data extraction with mathematical manipulation. 6. Data reports to allow development of XY curve plotting, tabular reports (both statistical and summary), and multi-point timed based plots with not less than four (4) variables displayed. 7. Generating reports either normally at operator direction, or automatically under workstation direction. 8. Either manually display or print reports. Automatically print reports on daily, weekly, monthly, yearly or scheduled basis. 9. Include capability for statistical data manipulation and extraction. 10. Capability to generate four types of reports: Statistical detail reports, summary reports, trend graphic plots, x-y graphic plots. K. Parameter Save/Restore: Store most current operating system, parameter changes, and modifications on disk or diskette. L. Data Collection: 1. Automatically collect and store in hard drive. 2. Daily electrical energy consumption, peak demand, and time of peak demand for up to electrical meters over 2-year period. 3. Daily consumption for up to 30 meters over a 2 year period. 4. Daily billable electrical energy consumption and time for up to 1024 zones over a 10 year period. 5. Archiving of stored data for use with system supplied custom reports. M. Graphic Display: Support graphic development on work station with software features: 1. Page linking. 2. Generate, store, and retrieve library symbols. 3. Single or double height characters. 4. Sixty (60) dynamic points of data for each graphic page. 5. Pixel level resolution. 6. Animated graphics for discrete points. 7. Analog bar graphs. 8. Display real time value of each input or output line diagram fashion. N. Maintenance Management: 1. Run time monitoring, for each point. 2. Maintenance scheduling targets with automatic annunciation, scheduling and shutdown. 3. Equipment safety targets. 4. Display of maintenance material and estimated labor. 5. Target point reset, for each point. O. Advisories: 1. Summary containing status of points in locked out condition. 2. Continuous operational or not operational report of interrogation of system hardware and programmable control units for failure. 3. Report of power failure detection, time and date. University of Connecticut DIRECT DIGITAL CONTROL SYSTEM FOR HVAC 23 0923 -10 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 4. Report of communication failure with operator device, field interface unit, point and programmable control unit. 2.07 LOAD CONTROL PROGRAMS A. General: Support inch-pounds and S.I. metric units of measurement. B. Demand Limiting: 1. Monitor total power consumption for each power meter and shed associated loads automatically to reduce power consumption to an operator set maximum demand level. 2. Input: Pulse count from incoming power meter connected to pulse accumulator in control unit. 3. Forecast demand (kW): Predicted by sliding window method. 4. Automatically shed loads throughout the demand interval selecting loads with independently adjustable on and off time of between one and 255 minutes. 5. Demand Target: Minimum of 3 for each demand meter; change targets based upon (1) time, (2) status of pre-selected points, or (3) temperature. 6. Load: Assign load shed priority, minimum "ON" time and maximum "OFF" time. 7. Limits: Include control band (upper and lower limits). 8. Output advisory when loads are not available to satisfy required shed quantity, advise shed requirements [and requiring operator acknowledgment]. C. Duty Cycling: 1. Periodically stop and start loads, based on space temperature, and according to various On/Off patterns. 2. Modify off portion of cycle based on operator specified comfort parameters. Maintain total cycle time by increasing on portion of cycle by equal quantity off portion is reduced. 3. Set and modify following parameters for each individual load. a. Minimum and maximum off time. b. On/Off time in one-minute increments. c. Time period from beginning of interval until cycling of load. d. Manually override the DDC program and place a load in an On or Off state. e. Cooling Target Temperature and Differential. f. Heating Target Temperature and Differential. g. Cycle off adjustment. D. Automatic Time Scheduling: 1. Self-contained programs for automatic start/stop/scheduling of building loads. 2. Support up to seven (7) normal day schedules, seven (7) "special day" schedules and two (2) temporary day schedules. 3. Special day’s schedule supporting up to 30 unique date/duration combinations. 4. Number of loads assigned to time program; with each load having individual time program. 5. Each load assigned at least 16 control actions for each day with 1 minute resolution. 6. Furnish the following time schedule operations: a. Start. b. Optimized Start. University of Connecticut DIRECT DIGITAL CONTROL SYSTEM FOR HVAC 23 0923 -11 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 c. Stop. d. Optimized Stop. e. Cycle. f. Optimized Cycle. 7. Capable of specifying minimum of 30 holiday periods up to 100 days in length for the year. 8. Create temporary schedules. 9. Broadcast temporary "special day" date and duration. E. Start/Stop Time Optimization: 1. Perform optimized start/stop as function of outside conditions, inside conditions, or both. 2. Adaptive and self-tuning, adjusting to changing conditions unattended. 3. For each point under control, establish and modify: a. Occupancy period. b. Desired temperature at beginning of occupancy period. c. Desired temperature at end of occupancy period. F. Night Setback/Setup Program: Reduce heating space temperature set point or raise cooling space temperature set-point during unoccupied hours; in conjunction with scheduled start/stop and optimum start/stop programs. G. Calculated Points: Define calculations and totals computed from monitored points (analog/digital points), constants, or other calculated points. 1. Employ arithmetic, algebraic, Boolean, and special function operations. 2. Treat calculated values like any other analog value; use for any function where a "hard wired point" might be used. H. Event Initiated Programming: Any data point capable of initiating event, causing series of controls in a sequence. 1. Define time interval between each control action between 0 to 3600 seconds. 2. Output may be analog value. 3. Provide for "skip" logic. 4. Verify completion of one action before proceeding to next action. When not verified, program capable of skipping to next action. I. Direct Digital Control: Furnish with each control unit Direct Digital Control software so operator is capable of customizing control strategies and sequences of operation by defining appropriate control loop algorithms and choosing optimum loop parameters. 1. Control loops: Defined using "modules" are analogous to standard control devices. 2. Output: Paired or individual digital outputs for pulse width modulation, and analog outputs. 3. Firmware: a. PID with analog or pulse-width modulation output. b. Floating control with pulse-width modulated outputs. c. Two-position control. d. Primary and secondary reset schedule selector. e. Hi/Low signal selector. f. Single pole double-throw relay. University of Connecticut DIRECT DIGITAL CONTROL SYSTEM FOR HVAC 23 0923 -12 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 g. Single pole double throw time delay relay with delay before break, delay before make and interval time capabilities. 4. Direct Digital Control loop: Downloaded upon creation or on operator request. On sensor failure, program executes user defined failsafe output. 5. Display: Value or state of each of lines interconnecting DDC modules. J. Fine Tuning Direct Digital Control PID or floating loops: 1. Display information: a. Control loop being tuned. b. Input (process) variable. c. Output (control) variable. d. Set-point of loop. e. Proportional band. f. Integral (reset) Interval. g. Derivative (rate) Interval. 2. Display format: Graphic, with automatic scaling; with input and output variable superimposed on graph of "time" versus "variable". K. Trend logging: 1. Each control unit capable of storing samples of control unit's data points. 2. Update file continuously at operator assigned intervals. 3. Automatically initiate upload requests and then stores data on hard disk. 4. Time synchronize sampling at operator specified times and intervals with sample resolution of one minute. 5. Co-ordinate sampling with specified on/off point-state. 6. Display trend samples on workstation in graphic format. Automatically scale trend graph with minimum 60 samples of data in plot of time versus data. 2.08 HVAC CONTROL PROGRAMS A. General: 1. Support Inch-pounds and S.I. metric units of measurement. 2. Identify each HVAC Control system. B. Optimal Run Time: 1. Control start-up and shutdown times of HVAC equipment for both heating and cooling. 2. Base on occupancy schedules, outside air temperature, seasonal requirements, and interior room mass temperature. 3. Start-up systems by using outside air temperature, room mass temperatures, and adaptive model prediction for how long building takes to warm up or cool down under different conditions. 4. Use outside air temperature to determine early shut down with ventilation override. 5. Analyze multiple building mass sensors to determine seasonal mode and worse case condition for each day. 6. Operator commands: a. Define term schedule. b. Add/delete fan status point. c. Add/delete outside air temperature point. University of Connecticut DIRECT DIGITAL CONTROL SYSTEM FOR HVAC 23 0923 -13 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 d. Add/delete mass temperature point. e. Define heating/cooling parameters. f. Define mass sensor heating/cooling parameters. g. Lock/unlock program. h. Request optimal run-time control summary. i. Request optimal run-time mass temperature summary. j. Request HVAC point summary. k. Request HVAC saving profile summary. 7. Control Summary: a. HVAC Control system begin/end status. b. Optimal run time lock/unlock control status. c. Heating/cooling mode status. d. Optimal run time schedule. e. Start/Stop times. f. Selected mass temperature point ID. g. Optimal run-time system normal start-times. h. Occupancy and vacancy times. i. Optimal run time system heating/cooling mode parameters. 8. Mass temperature summary: a. Mass temperature point type and ID. b. Desired and current mass temperature values. c. Calculated warm-up/cool-down time for each mass temperature. d. Heating/cooling season limits. e. Break point temperature for cooling mode analysis. 9. HVAC point summary: a. Control system identifier and status. b. Point ID and status. c. Outside air temperature point ID and status. d. Mass temperature point ID and status. e. Calculated optimal start and stop times. f. Period start. C. Supply Air Reset: 1. Monitor heating and cooling loads in building spaces, terminal reheat systems, both hot deck and cold deck temperatures on dual duct and multizone systems, single zone unit discharge temperatures. 2. Adjust discharge temperatures to most energy efficient levels satisfying measured load by: a. Raising cooling temperatures to highest possible value. b. Reducing heating temperatures to lowest possible level. 3. Operator commands: a. Add/delete fan status point. b. Lock/unlock program. c. Request HVAC point summary. d. Add/Delete discharge controller point. e. Define discharge controller parameters. f. Add/delete air flow rate. University of Connecticut DIRECT DIGITAL CONTROL SYSTEM FOR HVAC 23 0923 -14 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 g. Define space load and load parameters. h. Request space load summary. 4. Control summary: a. HVAC control system status (begin/end). b. Supply air reset system status. c. Optimal run time system status. d. Heating and cooling loop. e. High/low limits. f. Deadband. g. Response timer. h. Reset times. 5. Space load summary: a. HVAC system status. b. Optimal run time status. c. Heating/cooling loop status. d. Space load point ID. e. Current space load point value. f. Control heat/cool limited. g. Gain factor. h. Calculated reset values. i. Fan status point ID and status. j. Control discharge temperature point ID and status. k. Space load point ID and status. l. Airflow rate point ID and status. D. Enthalpy Switchover: 1. Calculate outside and return air enthalpy using measured temperature and relative humidity; determine energy expended and control outside and return air dampers. 2. Operator commands: a. Add/delete fan status point. b. Add/delete outside air temperature point. c. Add/delete discharge controller point. d. Define discharge controller parameters. e. Add/delete return air temperature point. f. Add/delete outside air dewpoint/humidity point. g. Add/delete return air dewpoint/humidity point. h. Add/delete damper switch. i. Add/delete minimum outside air. j. Add/delete atmospheric pressure. k. Add/delete heating override switch. l. Add/delete evaporative cooling switch. m. Add/delete air flow rate. n. Define enthalpy deadband. o. Lock/unlock program. p. Request control summary. q. Request HVAC point summary. University of Connecticut DIRECT DIGITAL CONTROL SYSTEM FOR HVAC 23 0923 -15 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 3. Control summary: a. HVAC control system begin/end status. b. Enthalpy switchover optimal system status. c. Optimal return time system status. d. Current outside air enthalpy. e. Calculated mixed air enthalpy. f. Calculated cooling cool enthalpy using outside air. g. Calculated cooling cool enthalpy using mixed air. h. Calculated enthalpy difference. i. Enthalpy switchover deadband. j. Status of damper mode switch. 2.09 PROGRAMMING APPLICATION FEATURES A. Trend Point: 1. Sample up to 100 points, real or computed, with each point capable of collecting 100 samples at intervals specified in minutes, hours, days, or month. 2. Output trend logs as line-graphs or bar graphs. Output graphic on terminal, with each point for line and bar graphs designated with a unique [pattern] [color], vertical scale either actual values or percent of range, and horizontal scale time base. Print trend logs up to 12 columns of one point/column. B. Alarm Messages: 1. Allow definition of minimum of 1000 messages, each having minimum length of 100 characters for each individual message. 2. Assign alarm messages to system messages including point's alarm condition, point's off-normal condition, totaled point's warning limit, hardware elements advisories. 3. Output assigned alarm with "message requiring acknowledgment". 4. Operator commands include define, modify, or delete; output summary listing current alarms and assignments; output summary defining assigned points. C. Weekly Scheduling: 1. Automatically initiate equipment or system commands, based on selected time schedule for points specified. 2. Program times for each day of week, for each point, with one minute resolution. 3. Automatically generate alarm output for points not responding to command. 4. Allow for holidays, minimum of 366 consecutive holidays. 5. Operator commands: a. System logs and summaries. b. Start of stop point. c. Lock or unlock control or alarm input. d. Add, delete, or modify analog limits and differentials. e. Adjust point operation position. f. Change point operational mode. g. Open or close point. h. Enable/disable, lock/unlock, or execute interlock sequence or computation profile. i. Begin or end point totals. University of Connecticut DIRECT DIGITAL CONTROL SYSTEM FOR HVAC 23 0923 -16 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 j. Modify total values and limits. k. Access or secure point. l. Begin or end HVAC or load control system. m. Modify load parameter. n. Modify demand limiting and duty cycle targets. 6. Output summary: Listing of programmed function points, associated program times, and respective day of week programmed points by software groups or time of day. D. Interlocking: 1. Permit events to occur, based on changing condition of one or more associated master points. 2. Binary contact, high/low limit of analog point or computed point capable of being used as master. Master capable of monitoring or commanding multiple slaves. 3. Operator commands: a. Define single master/multiple master interlock process. b. Define logic interlock process. c. Lock/unlock program. d. Enable/disable interlock process. e. Execute terminate interlock process. f. Request interlock type summary. 2.10 CONTROL DAMPERS A. Acceptable Manufacturers: 1. Tamco 2. Belimo 3. Substitutions: Not allowed 2.11 CONTROL VALVES A. Acceptable Manufacturers: 1. Belimo 2. Flow Control 3. HCI 4. Substitutions: Not allowed PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 EXAMINATION A. Section 01 -Administrative Requirements: Coordination and project conditions. B. Verify conditioned power supply is available to control units. C. Verify field end devices, wiring, and pneumatic tubing is installed prior to installation proceeding. 3.02 INSTALLATION A. Install control units and other hardware in position on permanent walls where not subject to excessive vibration. B. Install software in control units and in existing operator workstation. Implement features of programs to specified requirements and appropriate to sequence of operation. Refer to Section 23 09 93. University of Connecticut DIRECT DIGITAL CONTROL SYSTEM FOR HVAC 23 0923 -17 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 C. Install with 120 volts alternating current, 15 amp dedicated emergency power circuit to each programmable control unit. D. Install conduit and electrical wiring in accordance with Section 26 05 03. E. Install electrical material and installation in accordance with appropriate requirements of Division 26. 3.03 MANUFACTURER'S FIELD SERVICES A. Section 01 -Quality Requirements: Manufacturers’ field services. B. Start and commission systems. Allow adequate time for start-up and commissioning prior to placing control systems in permanent operation. C. Furnish service technician employed by system installer to instruct Owner's representative in operation of systems plant and equipment for 3day period. 3.04 DEMONSTRATION AND TRAINING A. Section 01 -Execution and Closeout Requirements: Requirements for demonstration and training. B. Furnish basic operator training for up to 12 persons on data display, alarm and status descriptors, requesting data, execution commands and log requests. Include a minimum of 40 hours instructor time. Furnish training on site. C. Demonstrate complete and operating system to Owner. END OF SECTION University of Connecticut SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS FOR HVAC CONTROLS 23 0993 -1 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 SECTION 230993 SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS FOR HVAC CONTROLS PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.02 SUMMARY A. Section includes control sequences for DDC for HVAC systems, subsystems, and equipment. 1. General 2. Heating System Central Plant. 3. AHU / RTU Sequence of Operations 4. DOAS Sequence of Operations 5. Fans 6. VRF and Hot Water Heat Sequence of Operations 7. Cabinet Unit Heaters 8. Unit Heaters 9. Electric Unit Heaters 10. Split System Air Conditioning Units 11. Water Heaters 12. Domestic Hot Water Recirculation Pumps 13. Domestic Hot Water Thermostatic Mixing Valves 14. Lighting Controls 15. Alarms B. Related Sections: 1. Section 23 09 23 -Direct-Digital Control (DDC) System for HVAC: For equipment, devices, system components, and software to implement sequences of operation. 1.03 DEFINITIONS A. Analog Output: Proportional output signal (zero-to 10-V dc, 4 to 20 mA). B. Binary Output: On/off output signal or contact closure. C. DDC: Direct digital control. D. Digital Output: Data output that must be interpreted digitally. 1.04 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: 1. An instrumentation list for each controlled system. Label each element of the controlled system in table format. Show, in the table element name, type of device, manufacturer, model number, and control device product data sheet number. 2. A complete description of the operation of the control system, including sequences of operation. Include and reference a schematic diagram of the controlled system. B. Shop Drawings: University of Connecticut SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS FOR HVAC CONTROLS 23 0993 -2 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1. Riser diagrams showing control network layout, communication protocol, and wire types. 2. Schematic diagram of each controlled system. Include all control points labeled with point names shown or listed. Show the location of control elements in the system. 3. Wiring diagram for each controlled system. Show all control elements labels. Where a control element is the same as that shown on the control system schematic, label with the same name. Label all terminals. 4. Draft copies of graphic displays indicating mechanical system components, control system components, and controlled function status and value. 5. Coordinate submittals with information requested in Section 23 09 23 1.05 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Division 1 Section “Execution and Closeout Requirements”: Closeout procedures. B. Project Record Documents: Record actual locations of components and set points of controls, including changes to sequences made after submission of shop drawings. PART 2 PRODUCTS A. Refer to Section 23 09 23 -Direct-Digital Control System for HVAC PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 GENERAL A. Setpoints and values listed in the sequence of controls shall be adjustable by the Owner thru the Building Automation System (BAS). The Building Automation System (BAS) or direct digital controls (DDC) or Building Management System (BMS) are used interchangeably and share the same meaning. B. Other than utility rooms and corridors, space temperature sensor shall be capable of placing the associated systems into the occupied mode for a period of two hours (adj.). C. All heating, cooling and ventilation systems shall shut down upon activation of life safety systems. Once the life safety system has been reset, BMS shall be capable of automatically/remotely restarting all heating, cooling and ventilation systems that were shut down from this life safety event. Systems shall be restarted after an investigation of the life safety alarm event and in the presence of the UCONN Fire Department. D. The VRF manufacturer will supply remote thermistors and the associated cabling/wiring for each indoor VRF unit. The remote thermistor and associated cabling/wiring for each indoor VRF unit shall be installed by the ATC contractor. E. There shall be independent interfaces for each global setting. Global groups and associated properties shall include schedule intervals and temperature setpoint. Listed below are the global control categories and associated parameters. All setpoints shall be approved by the owner and then owner adjustable after approval. 1. Global Group Category: a. Corridor b. Office / Study Areas c. Locker Rooms / Bathrooms d. Athletic Spaces e. Water / Hydrotherapy Spaces f. Utility Rooms University of Connecticut SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS FOR HVAC CONTROLS 23 0993 -3 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2. Schedule Parameter. Apply the following schedule parameters to Utility global group category: a. 24hrs/7days. 3. Occupied Schedule Parameter. Apply the following schedule parameters to each global group category: a. Occupied schedule shall occur when the unit is not in unoccupied mode. 4. Base Room Set points shall be 72 F. .5. Unoccupied Heating Setpoint Parameter: a. Corridor: 60 F .b. Office / Study Areas: 60 F .F .60LockerRooms/Bathrooms: c. F .60AthleticSpaces: d. e. Water / Hydrotherapy Spaces: 60 F .f. Utility Rooms: 60 F .Fbelowroomsetpoint): .OccupiedHeatingSetpointParameter(1.5 6. a. Corridor: 70.5 F .b. Office / Study Areas: 70.5 F .c. Locker Rooms / Bathrooms: 70.5 F .d. Athletic Spaces: 70.5 F .e. Water / Hydrotherapy Spaces: 70.5 F .f. Utility Rooms: 70.5 F .7. Unoccupied Cooling Setpoint Parameter: a. Corridor: 82 F .b. Office / Study Areas: 82 F .F .82LockerRooms/Bathrooms: c. F .82AthleticSpaces: d. e. Water / Hydrotherapy Spaces: 82 F .f. Utility Rooms: n/a 8. Occupied Cooling Setpoint Parameter (1.5 F above room set point): .a. Corridor: 73.5 F .b. Office / Study Areas: 73.5 F .c. Locker Rooms / Bathrooms: 73.5 F .d. Athletic Spaces: 73.5 F .e. Water / Hydrotherapy Spaces: 73.5 F .f. Utility Rooms: n/a 9. Unoccupied Dehumidification Setpoint Parameter: a. Corridor: 60% b. Office / Study Areas: 60% c. Locker Rooms / Bathrooms: 60% d. Athletic Spaces: 60% e. Water / Hydrotherapy Spaces: 60% f. Utility Rooms: n/a 10. Large Conference Spaces and larges spaces with occupancy sensors: a. Relaxed Cooling Set point (4 F above room set point: Default 76 F). .b. Relaxed Cooling Set point (4 F below room set point: Default 68 F). .University of Connecticut SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS FOR HVAC CONTROLS 23 0993 -4 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 11. Occupied Dehumidification Setpoint Parameter: a. Corridor: 55% b. Office / Study Areas: 55% c. Locker Rooms / Bathrooms: 55% d. Athletic Spaces: 60% e. Water / Hydrotherapy Spaces: 55% f. Utility Rooms: n/a 3.02 HEATING SYSTEM CENTRAL PLANT A. The BAS shall index heating plant (fed by campus wide steam) to heating mode when outdoor air temperature decreases below 65°F. BAS unit controller to operate if all of the following devices are not activated. 1. Internal safety devices. 2. Low flow. B. BAS shall linear reset hot water supply temperature based on outdoor air temp as follows 1. Below 20°F OAT: 140°F. 2. From 21° F to 59° F OAT: 130°F. 3. Above 60° F OAT: 120° F C. BMS will monitor glycol percentage. D. BAS shall enable the hot water pumping system (HWP-1 & HWP-2) into heating mode and command the pump control sequence as follows 1. Start the lead pump in sequence. The BAS shall monitor pump status. The lead pump shall be rotated based upon runtime and a pre-determined time range. When pumps swap lead/stand-by, the pumps staging on and off should slowly ramp up and down in speed to maintain pressure control. 2. The hot water system shall be controlled to maintain the design pressure setpoint for the system as determined by the TAB. As the system pressure drop increases, the BAS will command the pump VFD to decrease its output. As the system pressure drop decreases, the BAS will command the pump VFD to increase its output. E. Order of Operation: 1. Once the outside temperature decreases below 65 °F (adj.) the heating central plant shall be enabled into heating mode. Listed below is the order of operations: a. Primary-variable pumps shall operate. b. Once Proof of flow has been established via flow meter and differential pressure, BMS shall enable 1/3 steam control valves. c. 1/3 steam control valve shall open to minimum position and modulate as necessary to maintain hot water supply temperature setpoint. If 1/3 valve is open 100% and hot water supply temperature setpoint is not maintained, 2/3 valve shall open to minimum setpoint. 2/3 valve shall modulate as necessary to maintain hot water supply temperature setpoint. When modulating downward towards minimum position, the reverse sequence shall occur. F. Order of Deactivation: University of Connecticut SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS FOR HVAC CONTROLS 23 0993 -5 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1. Deactivated heating plant when outside air temperature increases above 65 °F (adj.) for 48 consecutive hours. Listed below is the order of operations a. 1st: Heat exchanger valve shall close b. 2nd: primary-variable pumps shall not operate 3.03 AIR HANDLING UNIT SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS (AHU-1 THRU AHU-10) A. Enabling: AHU will be controlled by the building automation system (BAS) unless otherwise noted. AHU factory furnished controller will control compressor and condenser functions for cooling mode and dehumidification mode. BAS unit controller to operate in occupied mode or unoccupied mode if any of the following devises are not activated. 1. Internal safety devices. 2. Smoke Detector. 3. Low temperature limit. 4. High static pressure. B. Unoccupied and Occupied Mode: 1. Based on a timed schedule, BAS shall index unit to either unoccupied or occupied mode. C. Unoccupied Mode Control 1. Unoccupied Damper Control: BAS controller shall command the following control sequence: D. Outside air damper shall be fully closed. E. Exhaust air damper shall be fully closed. F. Mixed air damper fully opened. G. Unoccupied Fan Control: BAS controller shall command the following control sequence: 1. Supply fan VFD shall be off unless unoccupied heating mode or unoccupied cooling mode is activated. 2. Exhaust fan VFD shall be off. H. Unoccupied Heating Control. BAS controller shall command the following control sequence: 1. When space temperature decreases below unoccupied setpoint, the following sequence shall be performed: a. Supply fan shall start and ramp to minimum speed. b. Hot water control valve shall modulate as required to maintain discharge air temperature setpoint. c. Supply fan shall modulate as necessary to maintain unoccupied heating setpoint. 2. Unoccupied Cooling Control. BAS controller shall index AHU factory DX system controller to cooling mode. When space temperature increases above unoccupied setpoint, the following sequence shall be performed: a. BAS shall command supply fan to operate at a predetermined fan speed as determined by the TAB. b. AHU factory DX controller to enable DX compressor(s) as required to maintain discharge air temperature setpoint. University of Connecticut SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS FOR HVAC CONTROLS 23 0993 -6 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 I. Morning Warm-Up Control 1. Morning Warm-Up Damper Control: BAS controller shall command the following control sequence: a. Outside air damper shall be fully closed. b. Exhaust air damper shall be fully closed. c. Mixed air damper fully opened. 2. Morning Warm-Up Fan Control. BAS controller shall command the following control sequence: a. Supply fan VFD shall modulate the supply fan to predetermined frequency setpoint as established by the TAB. b. Exhaust fan VFD shall be off. 3. Morning Warm-Up Heating Mode Control. BAS controller shall command the following control sequence: a. When space temperature decreases below setpoint, Hot water control valve shall modulate as required to maintain discharge air temperature setpoint. J. Occupied Mode: 1. Occupied Damper Actuator Control. BAS controller shall command the following control sequence: a. Initial damper command: 1) Modulate OA damper and RA damper to minimum ventilation damper position as established by the TAB. 2) Exhaust air damper shall be fully open. b. Damper position after proof of supply airflow: 1) Modulate outside air damper and return air damper as required to maintain the space CO2 setpoint (800 ppm) unless economizer cooling is enabled. Outside air damper shall modulate from minimum occupied position to design occupied position. It shall never close during occupied hours, nor should it open beyond the design occupied position unless commanded into economizer mode. 2) Minimum occupied outdoor air damper position shall be set based on TAB flow rate of minimum occupied outdoor air rate (CFM per sq ft for each space) 3) Exhaust air damper shall be fully open. 2. BAS shall monitor supply air AFMS and exhaust air AFMS. 3. Occupied Mode Fan Control: BAS controller shall command the following control sequence: a. Supply fan VFD shall modulate the supply fan to predetermined frequency setpoint as established by the TAB. b. Exhaust fan VFD shall modulate as required to maintain building differential pressure setpoint between indoor space pressure and outdoor pressure. BAS shall monitor and display exhaust air flow form the exhaust air AFMS. 4. Occupied Heating Mode Control: BAS controller shall command the following control sequence: a. When space temperature decreases below setpoint, hot water control valve shall modulate as required to maintain discharge air temperature setpoint. 5. Occupied Cooling Mode Control. When space temperature increases above occupied setpoint, the following sequence shall be performed: University of Connecticut SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS FOR HVAC CONTROLS 23 0993 -7 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 a. BAS shall enable economizer cooling mode when space temperature increases above setpoint and indoor enthalpy is greater than outdoor enthalpy. Control sequence listed below for economizer cooling: 1) Mechanical cooling and dehumidification mode locked-out 2) Modulate return air damper and outside air damper as required to maintain discharge air setpoint. 3) Exhaust air damper shall be fully opened. b. BAS controller shall index AHU factory DX controller to mechanical cooling mode. Mechanical cooling shall be enabled when space temperature increases above setpoint and economizer cooling is not enabled. Mechanical cooling control sequence listed below: 1) AHU factory DX controller shall operate as required to maintain discharge air temperature after the DX coil. 6. Occupied Dehumidification Mode Control. BAS shall be index to dehumidification mode when the space occupied calculated dewpoint temperature increases above occupied setpoint and cooling or heating mode is not activated. Dehumidification control sequence listed below: a. Modulate OA damper and RA damper to maintain design occupied ventilation based on OA AFMS value. Refer to Equipment schedule for airflow. b. AHU factory DX controller shall modulate DX coil as required to maintain DX coil discharge air temperature. c. AHU factory controller shall modulate hot gas coil as required to maintain hot gas coil discharge air temperature setpoint. K. Laundry Room 1. VAV box serving laundry room shall be linked with and track Dryer fan (DEF-1) airflow/operation. 2. Motorized damper at return air grille shall close upon activation of Dryer fan. Damper shall be closed when Dryer fan is not activated. 3.04 DOAS SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS (DOAS-1) A. Enabling: DOAS will be controlled by the building automation system (BAS) unless otherwise noted. DOAS factory furnished controller will control compressor and condenser functions for cooling mode and dehumidification mode. BAS unit controller to operate in occupied mode or unoccupied mode if any of the following devises are not activated. 1. Internal safety devices. 2. Smoke Detector. 3. Low temperature limit. 4. High static pressure. B. Unoccupied and Occupied Mode: 1. Based on a timed schedule, BAS shall index unit to either unoccupied or occupied mode. C. Unoccupied Mode 1. Unoccupied damper actuator control. BAS controller shall command the following control sequence: a. Outside air damper shall be fully closed. 2. Exhaust air damper shall be fully closed. University of Connecticut SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS FOR HVAC CONTROLS 23 0993 -8 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 3. Return air damper fully opened. 4. Exhaust air ERV wheel damper shall be fully closed. 5. Outside air ERV wheel damper shall be fully closed. D. Unoccupied Fan Control. BAS controller shall command the following control sequence: 1. Supply fan VFD shall be off. 2. Exhaust fan VFD shall be off. 3. Morning Warm-Up Control 4. Morning warm-up damper actuator control. BAS controller shall command the following control sequence: a. Outside air damper shall be fully closed. b. Exhaust air damper shall be fully closed. c. Mixed air damper fully opened. d. Exhaust air ERV wheel damper shall be fully closed. e. Outside air ERV wheel damper shall be fully closed. 5. Morning Warm-Up Fan Control. BAS controller shall command the following control sequence: a. Supply fan VFD shall modulate the supply fan as required to maintain ductwork static pressure only after all supply and exhaust dampers are 50% open. b. Exhaust fan VFD shall be off. 6. Morning Warm-Up Heating Mode Control. BAS shall modulate hot water control valve as required to maintain discharge air temperature set point. E. Occupied Mode: 1. Occupied Damper Actuator Control. BAS controller shall command the following control sequence: a. Outside air damper shall be fully open. b. Exhaust air damper shall be fully open. c. Outside air ERV wheel bypass damper shall be fully closed unless economizer cooling is enabled. d. Exhaust air ERV wheel bypass damper shall be fully closed unless economizer cooling is enabled. 2. Air Flow measuring station (AFMS) serving OA intake and EA discharge. BAS controller shall monitor OA and EA airflow. OA and EA airflow shall be displayed on the operator work station. 3. Energy Wheel Control. BAS controller shall command the following control sequence: a. Energy wheel shall be enabled to start unless economizer cooling is enabled. 4. DOAS Fan Control. BAS controller shall command the following control sequence: a. Supply fan VFD shall modulate the supply fan as required to maintain ductwork static pressure. F. Exhaust fan VFD shall modulate as required to maintain EA AFMS airflow. EA AFMS airflow shall track OA AFMS airflow. 1. Discharge air temperature control: BAS controller shall command the following control sequence: University of Connecticut SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS FOR HVAC CONTROLS 23 0993 -9 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 a. When discharge air temperature set point decreases below setpoint, BAS controller shall modulate hot water control valve as required to maintain discharge air temperature setpoint. b. When discharge air temperature increases above setpoint, and OA temperature and enthalpy is less than return air temperature and enthalpy, BAS controller shall enable economizer mode. BAS controller shall command the following economizer control sequence: 1) Mechanical cooling and dehumidification mode locked-out 2) Exhaust air ERV wheel damper shall be fully opened. 3) Outside air ERV wheel damper shall be fully opened. c. BAS controller shall index RTU factory controller to mechanical cooling mode when space temperature increases above setpoint and economizer cooling is not enabled. Mechanical cooling control sequence listed below. 1) DOAS factory DX controller shall operate as required to maintain temperature after the DX coil. 2. Occupied Dehumidification Mode Control. BAS shall be index to dehumidification mode when the mixed air dewpoint temperature increases above setpoint and cooling or heating mode is not activated. Dehumidification control sequence listed below: a. DOAS factory controller shall modulate DX coil as required to maintain DX coil discharge air temperature. b. DOAS factory controller shall modulate hot gas coil as required to maintain hot gas coil discharge air temperature. 3.05 FANS A. Radon exhaust fan (REF-1 & REF-2). 1. Exhaust fans shall operate continuously (24 hours a day, 7 days a week). Provide monitoring of fans. 3.06 MECHANICAL ROOM EXHAUST FAN A. Shall operate (24 hours per day / 7 days per week) B. The exhaust damper shall be opened. When the damper is proven to be open, the fan will be enabled. If the fan does not operate, an alarm will be generated at the AWS. 3.07 CIRCULATION FANS/HVLS (SF-1 THRU SF-10) A. Run Conditions – Scheduled Occupancy: Fans shall operate according to a user definable time schedule. Fans shall be enabled during occupied period heating mode, fan shall be disabled during cooling mode and unoccupied mode. 1. Occupied: When the unit is in the occupied mode, the Fans shall run continuously. Fan Status Shall be monitored by the BAS. If Fan Status does not match the commanded value, an alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. 2. Unoccupied: When the unit is in the unoccupied mode, the Fans shall be off. Fan Status shall be made available to BAS. If Fan Status does not match the commanded value, an alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. 3. Occupied Override: An authorized user at the Operator Workstation shall be able to override the current mode of operation. 3.08 BASEMENT EXHAUST AND SUPPLY FANS (EF-10 & SAF-1) University of Connecticut SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS FOR HVAC CONTROLS 23 0993 -10 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 A. Supply fan (SAF-1) at basement to be interlocked with operation of exhaust fan (EF-10), Supply fan shall operate if EF-10 is activated. Upon activation of these two fans associated outside air intake louver shall open. Louver shall be normally closed. 3.09 VRF SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS A. The BAS shall enable, disable, set operating modes and send setpoints to the VRF Controls System via BACnet Communication interface. For the VRF system, enable indicates the unit is on and disable indicates the unit is off. Setpoint temperature will define the occupied and unoccupied condition. B. The Automatic Temperature Controls (ATC) contractor shall also be responsible for installation and communication wiring of all VRF control components to provide a complete and operational system including but not limited to return air thermistor, indoor units (air handlers and heat recovery boxes), and outdoor units. The VRF manufacturer shall furnish (1) wall controller per indoor unit and associated cabling (regardless of quantity shown on Mechanical piping drawings). C. BAS shall index the VRF zone into off mode (unoccupied), fan mode, heat mode and cool mode. For heating or cooling mode, BAS shall send setpoint temperature to VRF control system D. Morning Warm-up Control for VRF heating control: 1. BAS shall enable morning warm-up during optimal time scheduling when OA BASshallindexthefollowingheatingstages: F. .temperatureisbelow64 a. When space temperature decreases below heating setpoint, BAS shall command VRF to heating mode with morning space temperature setpoint. E. Unoccupied heating control for VRF heating control: F .BASshallenableunoccupiedheatingmodewhenOAtemperatureisbelow64 1. during unoccupied time schedule. BAS shall index the following heating stages: a. When space temperature decreases below heating setpoint, BAS shall command VRF to heating mode with unoccupied space temperature setpoint. F. Occupied heating control for VRF heating control: 1. BAS shall enable occupied heating mode when OA temperature is below 64 F during .occupied time schedule. BAS shall index the following heating stages: a. When space temperature decreases below heating setpoint, BAS shall command VRF to heating mode with occupied space temperature setpoint. G. Occupied / Unoccupied Cooling Mode Control: 1. When space temperature increases above cooling setpoint, BAS shall command VRF to cooling mode with either an occupied or unoccupied space temperature setpoint. 3.10 CUH/UH SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS A. BAS shall command the CUH/UH into, unoccupied heating mode or morning warm-up mode or heating mode. B. Unoccupied Heating Mode Control: 1. BAS shall enable unoccupied heating mode when outside air temperature is less than Fandcommandthecontrolsequence..orequalto64 University of Connecticut SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS FOR HVAC CONTROLS 23 0993 -11 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2. When space temperature decreases below unoccupied setpoint, the following sequence shall be performed: a. Two-position hot water control valve shall fully open F..Fanshallstartwheneitherthermistororaqua-statsetpointisgreaterthan100 b. C. Morning Warm-up Heating Mode Control: 1. BAS shall enable morning warm-up heating mode when outside air temperature is less Fandcommandthecontrolsequence..thanorequalto64 2. Based on time schedule, the following sequence shall be performed when space temperature decreases below morning warm-up setpoint. a. Two-position hot water control valve shall fully open F..Fanshallstartwheneitherthermistororaqua-statsetpointisgreaterthan100 b. D. Occupied Heating Mode Control: 1. BAS shall enable occupied heating mode when outside air temperature is less than or Fandcommandthecontrolsequence..equalto64 2. When space temperature decreases below occupied setpoint, the following sequence shall be performed: a. Two-position hot water control valve shall fully open F..Fanshallstartwheneitherthermistororaqua-statsetpointisgreaterthan100 b. 3.11 STEAM TO HOT WATER HEAT EXCHANGER A. When a heat exchanger is enabled, the BMS shall confirm proper operation via control valve feedback and temperature setpoint. If there is an indication the heat exchanger is not operating correctly, an alarm shall be generated at the BMS B. If heat exchanger has an alarm condition, respective isolation control valve shall close and an alarm shall occur at the central work station. C. BMS shall modulate steam control valves to maintain hot water supply temperature. If temperature is 1°F below setpoint, BMS shall modulate first stage control valve to maintain setpoint. Second stage valve shall be closed. If temperature is 2°F below setpoint, BMS shall modulate second stage valve to maintain setpoint. First stage valve shall remain open. D. The BMS shall monitor hot water supply and return temperatures at inlet and outlet of the heat exchanger. E. BMS shall reset temperature setpoint based on the user selected options of: a. Outside air reset schedule b. Demand at control valves for heating. 3.12 PUMPS A. Pumps (HWP-1, HWP-2, HWP-3 & HWP-4) 1. General a. Pumps shall be configured in a lead/lag configuration. The lead and lag designations shall be rotated weekly. b. Lead hot water pump shall start per demand for hot water. University of Connecticut SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS FOR HVAC CONTROLS 23 0993 -12 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 c. BMS shall monitor downstream hydronic dofferential pressure transmitters compared to user defind setpoints and modulate the pump VFD in order to maintain desired setpoints. d. When pump is enabled, the pump VFD status determines if the motor is operating. After an operator definable feedback time delay, if there is an indication that the pump is not operating, the standby pump shall be enabled and an alarm shall be generated. Conversely, if status is detected while pump is turned off, a separate alarm shall be generated. e. The lag pump shall be off, except shall operate upon failure of the lead pump. Pump failure shall be by current sensor. 2. Alarms a. High hot water temperature supply (HWS) temperature: 200°F. b. Low hot water temperature supply (HWS) temperature: 60.F. c. High hot water supply/return pressure difference: 25% greater than setpoint. d. Low hot water supply/return pressure difference: 25% lower than setpoint. e. Lead pump failure. 3. Hardware Points (in addition to those required by the sequence of control) a. Binary In: Pump P-1 variable frequency drive fault. b. Binary In: Pump P-2 variable frequency drive fault. c. Analog In: Pump P-1 variable frequency drive speed. d. Analog In: Pump P-2 variable frequency drive speed. 3.13 RADIANT CEILING PANELS A. Panel Radiator: Upon a drop in space temperature below sensor setpoint, respective heating valve shall open in order to maintain desired space temperature setpoint. Radiation control for areas served by VAV boxes shall be sequenced together with the respective VAV box valve in order to maintain desired space temperature setpoint. 3.14 ELECTRIC UNIT HEATERS A. Electric unit heaters shall be set at 40F (adj) to prevent piping from freezing in the event of hot water plant failure, on call for heating (when temperature drops below 40), coil shall be energized and fan shall start. B. BMS shall monitor space temperature and alarm if space temperature drops below 34F (adj). C. Provide control and monitoring of electric heaters, this shall include all relays and wiring needed to achieve this via BMS. 3.15 SPLIT SYSTEM AIR CONDITIONING UNITS (IT, MDF, IDF ROOMS ETC.) A. The Split System Air Conditioning units will be provided with integral controllers and wireless zone sensors by the unit manufacturer. B. The Automatic Temperature Controls (ATC) contractor shall also be responsible for installation and communication wiring of all split system components to provide a complete and operational system including but not limited to communication wiring between the indoor and outdoor unit. C. BAS shall monitor space temperature. If space temperature does not match setpoint for a predetermined time period, an alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. University of Connecticut SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS FOR HVAC CONTROLS 23 0993 -13 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 3.16 GLYCOL MAKE UP PACKAGES A. Connect to the alarm contacts of the glycol make-up package. Upon closure of contacts an alarm condition shall be generated at the DDC display. 1. Provide the following points and controls for the glycol make-up package. a. System enable. b. Low glycol level (float). c. Pump operation. d. Alarm. 3.17 GLYCOL REFRACTOMETER A. Connect glycol refractometer to DDC system for heating hot water system. Upon reading of 27% or less glycol in system an alarm condition shall be generated at the DDC display. Refractometer’s for both systems shall be installed per piping details and furnished by this specification section 3.18 WATER HEATERS (WH-1 & WH-2) A. The Building Automation System will communicate with Water Heater Manufacturer Supplied Control Panel via Bacnet. B. This division shall wire manufacturer supplied control panels so as to provide a complete and operational system. C. The following points will be made available for monitoring/ control for each water heater: 1. Status 2. Water Temperature 3. Firing Rate out 4. Run cycles low 5. Run hours low 6. Fire rate in 7. % rate of fire 3.19 DOMESTIC HOT WATER RECIRCULATION PUMPS (HWRP-1 & HWRP-2) A. Pump shall be indexed on during occupied hours. B. When return water temperature is 5°F lower than supply temperature, pump shall run until temperature is equal to hot water supply temperature. C. Alarms: Pump Failure. 3.20 DOMESTIC HOT WATER THERMOSTATIC MIXING VALVES (TV-1 & TV-2) A. BMS shall monitor the following points through a communications link: 1. Set point temperature (analog, degrees F). 2. Temperature status (analog, degrees F). 3. System status (binary, normal/alarm). B. Alarms: High temperature alarm, low temperature alarm. 3.21 LIGHTING CONTROLS INTERLOCK A. Corridor Lighting: 1. During occupied mode occupancy sensor shall be overridden and lights on for all of occupied time schedule. Upon system entering unoccupied mode occupancy University of Connecticut SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS FOR HVAC CONTROLS 23 0993 -14 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 sensor shall revert back to method of control for corridor lighting (when no motion is sensed lights will be off). B. Exterior lights shall be indexed on upon photocell detection of low lumen condition, at 11:59pm exterior lights shall be indexed off and remain off until 4:30am at which time exterior lights shall be indexed on and exterior lights shall remain on until photocell senses acceptable lumen level. During hours between 4:30am and 11:59pm exterior lights shall be enabled by BMS but only turn on upon low lumen condition as determined by photocell. Photocells (KELE MK&-B-CR or equal) necessary to accomplish above sequence on operation for exterior lights. Coordinate location of all necessary interconnections and photocell placement with Division 26. 3.22 ALARMS: A. Hot Water Plant Alarm. 1. BAS shall monitor hot water temperature (at heat exchanger). If temperature exceeds high limit, respective control valve at heat exchanger shall be command off and an alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. 2. BAS shall monitor HWS temperature. If temperature does not match setpoint for a predetermined time period, an alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. 3. BAS shall monitor HWR temperature. If temperature decrease below setpoint for a predetermined time period, an alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. 4. The BAS shall monitor lead pump status. If pump status does not match the commanded value, an alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation, the lead pump shall be commanded off, and the lag pump shall be commanded on. 5. The BAS shall monitor lag pump status. If pump status does not match the commanded value, an alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation, the lag pump shall be commanded off. 6. BAS shall monitor glycol percentage. If glycol percentage does not match setpoint, alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. 7. BAS shall monitor glycol make-up system alarm. Alarm shall be issued to BAS Operator Work Station if any alarms are activated. 8. BAS shall monitor CO gas detection system. Alarm shall be issued to BAS Operator Work Station if CO detection exceeds setpoint. 9. Bypass valve shall modulate to maintain secondary pumping loop minimum flow rate via Flowmeter GMP setpoint. If system flow decreases below low flow limit via flowmeter GMP setpoint, alarm shall be issued to Operator Work Station. Engineer of Record shall provide minimum flow rate value and low flow rate value. B. AHU Alarm. 1. BAS controller shall monitor RTU factory internal safety alarms. Alarm shall be issued to BAS Operator Work Station if any internal safety alarms are activated. 2. BAS controller shall monitor high static pressure switch status. ATC to provide supply and exhaust fan hard-wired shut down. BAS shall command the following on a high static pressure alarm: a. Alarm shall be issued to BAS Operator Work Station 3. BAS controller shall monitor freeze stat status. BAS shall command the following on a freeze stat alarm: University of Connecticut SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS FOR HVAC CONTROLS 23 0993 -15 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 a. Alarm shall be issued to BAS Operator Work Station b. Fully open return air damper c. Fully close OA damper and EA damper d. Fully close bypass dampers e. Fully close HW control valve 4. BAS controller shall monitor Smoke detector alarm status. Alarm shall be issued to the BAS Operator Work Station if duct mounted smoke detector is activated. Associated unit and fans shall not operate. 5. BAS controller shall monitor fan status. If fan status does not match the command, DX compressors shall not operate and alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. 6. BAS controller shall monitor filter status. If filter status does not match setpoint, an alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. 7. During unoccupied mode, BAS controller shall monitor case temperature status via the mixed air temperature sensor. When case temperature decreases below setpoint, BAS shall command the following: a. Fully open hot water b. An alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. 8. BAS controller shall monitor duct supply air discharge temperature status after the DX coil. If duct discharge temperature does not match setpoint for a predetermined time period, an alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. 9. BAS controller shall monitor duct supply air discharge dewpoint status after the DX coil. If duct discharge dewpoint does not match setpoint for a predetermined time period, an alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. 10. BAS controller shall monitor duct supply air discharge temperature status hot gas reheat coil. If duct discharge temperature does not match setpoint for a predetermined time period, an alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. 11. BAS controller shall monitor space temperature. If space temperature does not match setpoint for a predetermined time period, an alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. 12. BAS controller shall monitor space dew point temperature. If space dewpoint does not match setpoint for a predetermined time period, an alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. 13. BAS controller shall monitor space CO2 (in densely occupied spaces, that have a CO2 sensor located in room on plans). If space CO2 does not match setpoint for a predetermined time period, an alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. a. CO2 shall generate alarm to BMS if concentration exceeds setpoint by more than 10% as per LEED guidelines. C. DOAS Alarm. 1. BAS controller shall monitor DOA factory furnished internal safety alarms. Alarm shall be issued to BAS Operator Work Station if any internal safety alarms are activated. University of Connecticut SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS FOR HVAC CONTROLS 23 0993 -16 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2. BAS controller shall monitor high static pressure switch status. ATC to provide supply and exhaust fan hard-wired shut down. BAS shall command the following on a high static pressure alarm: a. Alarm shall be issued to BAS Operator Work Station 3. BAS controller shall monitor freeze stat status. ATC to provide supply and exhaust fan hard-wired shut down. BAS shall command the following on a freeze stat alarm: a. Alarm shall be issued to BAS Operator Work Station b. Fully open return air damper c. Fully close OA damper and EA damper d. Fully close bypass dampers e. Fully close HW control valve 4. BAS controller shall monitor Smoke detector alarm status. Alarm shall be issued to the BAS Operator Work Station if duct mounted smoke detector is activated. Associated unit and fans shall not operate. 5. BAS controller shall monitor fan status. If fan status does not match the command, DX compressors shall not operate and alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. 6. DOA Factory furnished controller shall monitor (3) filter status per DOA. If filter status does not match setpoint, an alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. 7. During unoccupied mode, BAS controller shall monitor case temperature status via the mixed air temperature sensor. When case temperature decreases below setpoint, BAS shall command the following: a. Fully open hot water b. An alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. 8. BAS controller shall monitor duct exhaust air discharge temperature status after the plate heat exchanger. If duct discharge temperature does not match setpoint for a predetermined time period, BAS shall enable dehumidification mode and command the following: a. Fully open exhaust air plate heat exchanger bypass dampers such that 100% of the airflow is diverted to the plate heat exchanger. b. Fully close OA plate heat exchanger bypass dampers such that 100% of the airflow is diverted to the bypass. c. An alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. 9. BAS controller shall monitor duct supply air discharge temperature status after the DX coil. If duct discharge temperature does not match setpoint for a predetermined time period, an alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. 10. BAS controller shall monitor duct supply air discharge dewpoint status after the DX coil. If duct discharge dewpoint does not match setpoint for a predetermined time period, an alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. 11. BAS controller shall monitor duct supply air discharge temperature status hot gas reheat coil. If duct discharge temperature does not match setpoint for a predetermined time period, an alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. University of Connecticut SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS FOR HVAC CONTROLS 23 0993 -17 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 12. DOA Factory furnished controller shall monitor filter status. If filter status does not match setpoint, an alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. D. Fan Alarm. 1. BAS controller shall monitor damper position. If damper position does not match the command, an alarm shall be generated at the BAS Operator Workstation and the associated fan shall be commanded to stop. 2. BAS controller shall monitor fan status. If fan status does not match the command, alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. E. VRF Alarm. 1. BAS shall monitor VRF control system internal safety alarms via BACnet interface. Alarm shall be issued to BAS Operator Work Station if any internal safety alarms are activated. 2. VRF control system shall monitor space temperature. Alarm shall be issued to BAS Operator Work Station if any space temperature does not match setpoint. 3. BAS shall monitor condensate auxiliary drain pan water detection. If sensor is activated, alarm shall be generated at the BAS Operator work station 4. BAS shall monitor space temperature status. If space temperature does not match setpoint for a predetermined time period, an alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. 5. BAS shall monitor space dewpoint status where temperature and humidity sensor are noted on plan. If space dewpoint does not match setpoint for a predetermined time period, an alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. F. CUH/UH Alarm. 1. BAS controller shall monitor fan status. If fan status does not match the command, alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. 2. BAS shall monitor space temperature status. If space temperature does not match setpoint for a predetermined time period, an alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. 3. BAS shall monitor HWR pipe temperature via thermistor. If temperature does not match setpoint for a predetermined time period, an alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. G. Ductless Split Alarm (IT rooms, IDF, MDF etc.). 1. BAS shall monitor VRF/AC/CU control system internal safety alarms via BACnet interface. Alarm shall be issued to BAS Operator Work Station if any internal safety alarms are activated. 2. BAS shall monitor space temperature status. If space temperature does not match setpoint for a predetermined time period, an alarm shall be generated at the Operator Workstation. H. Elevator Controllers 1. BAS shall monitor all three elevator controllers, in the event of a malfunction a signal shall be sent to the BAS and generate an alarm at the Operator workstation. I. Emergency Generator. 1. BAS shall monitor and provide the following: a. Generator Run Status University of Connecticut SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS FOR HVAC CONTROLS 23 0993 -18 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 b. Generator Alarm Status c. Gas pressure d. Oil pressure e. Coolant temperature f. Battery voltage g. Output voltage h. Currents J. Sump Pump. 1. Provide BMS monitoring of: a. Pump status (ON/OFF) b. Pump Fault c. High Level Alarm. END OF SECTION University of Connecticut HYDRONIC PIPING 23 2133 -1 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 SECTION 23 2113 HYDRONIC PIPING PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Heating water piping, above ground. B. Coil condensate drain piping C. Steam Piping D. Steam Condensate Piping E. Equipment drains and over flows. F. Unions and flanges. 1.02 RELATED SECTIONS A. Drawings and general provisions of the contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this section. 1.03 REFERENCES A. American Society of Mechanical Engineers: 1. ASME B16.18 -Cast Copper Alloy Solder Joint Pressure Fittings. 2. ASME B16.22 -Wrought Copper and Copper Alloy Solder Joint Pressure Fittings. 3. ASME B31.9 -Building Services Piping. 4. ASME Section IX -Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code -Welding and Brazing Qualifications. B. ASTM International: 1. ASTM A53/A53M -Standard Specification for Pipe, Steel, Black and Hot-Dipped, Zinc-Coated, Welded and Seamless. 2. ASTM A234/A234M -Standard Specification for Piping Fittings of Wrought Carbon Steel and Alloy Steel for Moderate and High Temperature Service. 3. ASTM B32 -Standard Specification for Solder Metal. 4. ASTM B75 – Standard Specification for Seamless Copper Tube. 5. ASTM B88 -Standard Specification for Seamless Copper Water Tube. 6. ASTM B584 -Standard Specification for Copper Alloy Sand Castings for General Applications. 7. ASTM D1785 -Standard Specification for Rigid Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Compounds and Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC) Compounds. 8. ASTM D2235 -Standard Specification for Solvent Cement for Acrylonitrile.Butadiene-Styrene (ABS) Plastic Pipe and Fittings. 9. ASTM D2241 -Standard Specification for Polyethylene (PE) Plastic Pipe (SIDR.PR) Based on Controlled Inside Diameter. 10. ASTM D2464 -Standard Specification for Threaded Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic Pipe Fittings, Schedule 80. 11. ASTM D2466 -Standard Specification for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic Pipe Fittings, Schedule 40. 12. ASTM D2467 -Standard Specification for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic Pipe Fittings, Schedule 80. University of Connecticut HYDRONIC PIPING 23 2133 -2 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 13. ASTM D2564 -Standard Specification for Solvent Cements for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic Piping Systems. 14. ASTM D2855 -Standard Practice for Making Solvent-Cemented Joints with Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Pipe and Fittings. 15. ASTM F437 -Standard Specification for Threaded Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC) Plastic Pipe Fittings, Schedule 80. 16. ASTM F438 -Standard Specification for Socket-Type Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC) Plastic Pipe Fittings, Schedule 40. 17. ASTM F439 -Standard Specification for Socket-Type Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC) Plastic Pipe Fittings, Schedule 80. 18. ASTM F441/F441M -Standard Specification for Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC) Plastic Pipe, Schedules 40 and 80. 19. ASTM F493 -Standard Specification for Solvent Cements for Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC) Plastic Pipe and Fittings. 20. ASTM F876 -Standard Specification for Crosslinked Polyethylene (PEX) Tubing. 21. ASTM F877 -Standard Specification for Crosslinked Polyethylene (PEX) Plastic Hot-and Cold-Water Distribution Systems. 22. ASTM F1476 -Standard Specification for Performance of Gasketed Mechanical Couplings for Use in Piping Applications. C. American Welding Society: 1. AWS A5.8 -Specification for Filler Metals for Brazing and Braze Welding. 2. AWS D1.1 -Structural Welding Code -Steel. 1.04 SYSTEM DESCRIPTION A. Where more than one piping system material is specified, provide compatible system components and joints. Use non-conducting dielectric connections whenever jointing dissimilar metals in open systems. B. Provide flanges, union, and couplings at locations requiring servicing. Use unions, flanges, and Grooved coupling couplings downstream of valves and at equipment or apparatus connections. Do not use direct welded or threaded connections to valves, equipment or other apparatus. 1.05 SUBMITTALS A. Shop Drawings: Indicate layout of piping system, including equipment, critical dimensions, and sizes. 1. Grooved joint couplings and fittings shall be shown on drawings and product submittals, and be specifically identified with the applicable Grooved coupling style or series number. B. Product Data: 1. Piping: Submit data on pipe materials, fittings, and accessories. Submit manufacturers catalog information. C. Test Reports: Indicate results of piping system pressure test. D. Welders’ Certificates. 1.06 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Project Record Documents: Record actual locations of valves equipment and accessories. University of Connecticut HYDRONIC PIPING 23 2133 -3 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1.07 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Perform Work in accordance with ASME B31.9 code for installation of piping systems and ASME Section IX for welding materials and procedures. B. Perform Work in accordance with applicable authority for welding hanger and support attachments to building structure. C. To assure uniformity and compatibility of piping components in grooved piping systems, all grooved products utilized shall be supplied by a single manufacturer. Grooving tools shall be supplied by the same manufacturer as the grooved components. 1.08 QUALIFICATIONS A. Fabricator or Installer: Company specializing in performing Work of this section with minimum three years documented experience. B. Installers of Pressure-Sealed Joints: Installers shall be certified by pressure-seal joint manufacturer as having been trained and qualified to join piping with pressure-seal pipe couplings and fittings. 1.09 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Provide temporary end caps and closures on piping and fittings. Maintain in place until installation. B. Protect piping systems from entry of foreign materials by temporary covers, completing sections of the Work, and isolating parts of completed system. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 STEEL PIPE AND FITTINGS A. Steel Pipe: ASTM A53/A53M., black steel with plain ends; welded and seamless, Grade B. 1. Fittings: ASME B16.3, malleable iron or ASTM A234/A234M, forged steel welding type. 2. Joints: Threaded for pipe 2 inch and smaller; welded for pipe 2-1/2 inches and larger. 3. Welding Filler Metals: Comply with AWS D10.12M/D10.12 for welding materials appropriate for wall thickness and chemical analysis of steel pipe being welded. B. Steel Pipe, grooved joints: ASTM A53/A53M, black steel with grooved ends. 1. Fittings: ASTM A536 ductile iron, or ASTM A53 forged steel or fabricated from carbon steel pipe, grooved ends designed to accept Grooved coupling standard or AGS “W” series couplings. 2. Joints: Grooved mechanical couplings meeting ASTM F1476. a. Housing Clamps: STM A536 ductile iron, enamel coated, compatible with steel piping sizes, rigid or flexible type. 1) Rigid Type: 2 inch through 12 inch: “Installation ready” rigid coupling with offsetting, angle pattern bolt pads designed for direct ‘stab’ installation onto grooved end pipe without prior disassembly of the coupling, no torque requirement and Grade “EHP” EPDM gasket. 2) Rigid Type: 14 inch through 24 inch: AGS grooves, wide housing key with flat bolt pads. Grade “E” EPDM FlushSeal® gasket. University of Connecticut HYDRONIC PIPING 23 2133 -4 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 3) Flexible Type: 2 inch through 24” inch: Use in locations where vibration attenuation and stress relief are required. Flexible couplings may be used in lieu of flexible connectors for vibration isolation at equipment connections. Three (3) couplings, for each connector, shall be placed in close proximity to the source of vibration. b. Grade “E” EPDM Gasket: Elastomer composition for operating temperature range from -30 degrees F to 230 degrees F. c. Grade “EHP” EPDM Gasket: Elastomer composition for operating temperature range from -30 degrees F to 250 degrees F d. Accessories: Steel bolts, nuts, and washers. C. Stainless Steel Pipe: ASTM A312, Schedule 10S for 2 inch and smaller, Type 304/304L, full finish annealed pipe. 1. Fittings: Precision cold drawn austenitic stainless steel, Type 304/304L, complete with synthetic rubber O-rings. 2. Joints: Press-seal a. O-rings: EPDM Elastomer composition for operating temperature range from .30 degrees F to 250degrees F. b. 500 PSI rated 2.02 COPPER PIPE AND FITTINGS A. Drawn-Temper Copper Tubing, solder joints: ASTM B88, Type K, L, or M as specified in part 3 for application. 1. Fittings: a. ASME B16.22, solder wrought copper. 2. Prohibited Tee Connections: Mechanically extracted collars with notched and dimpled branch tube (T-Drill) fittings are prohibited. 3. Joints: Solder, lead free, ASTM B32, 95-5 tin-antimony, or tin and silver, with melting range 430 to 535 degrees F. B. Drawn-Temper Copper Tubing, press-seal joints: ASTM B88, Type L or M as specified in section 3 for application. 1. Press Fittings: IAPMO PS 117, ANSI LC1002, NSF61-G 2. Housing: Copper. 3. O-Rings and Pipe Stops: EPDM. 4. Tools: Manufacturer's special tools. 5. Minimum 200-psig working-pressure rating at 250 deg F. 2.03 POLYETHYLENE PIPE AND FITTINGS A. Polyethylene Pipe: ASTM F876 and ASTM F877, cross-linked polyethylene, 100 psig operating pressure at 180 degrees F. 1. Fittings: Brass and copper. 2. Joints: Mechanical compression fittings. B. Composite Polyethylene Pipe: Aluminum tube laminated between two layers of cross-linked polyethylene, 125 psig operating pressure at maximum 140degrees F. 1. Fittings: Brass flared compression. 2. Joints: Fittings adapt to copper tubing or copper tube fittings, threaded pipe and fittings, and copper compression fittings. 2.04 PLASTIC PIPE AND FITTINGS University of Connecticut HYDRONIC PIPING 23 2133 -5 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 A. PVC Pipe: ASTM D1785, Schedule 40, polyvinyl chloride (PVC) material. 1. Fittings: ASTM D2466, Schedule 40, PVC. 2. Joints: ASTM D2855, solvent weld with ASTM D2564 solvent cement. Prime joints with a contrasting color. a. PVC solvent cement shall have a VOC content of 510 g/L or less. b. Adhesive primer shall have a VOC content of 550 g/L or less. B. CPVC Pipe: ASTM F441/F441M, Schedule 40, chlorinated polyvinyl chloride (CPVC) material. 1. Fittings: ASTM F438, CPVC, Schedule 40, socket type. 2. Joints: ASTM D2846/D2846M, solvent weld with ASTM F493 solvent cement. Prime joints with a contrasting color. a. CPVC solvent cement shall have a VOC content of 490 g/L or less. b. Adhesive primer shall have a VOC content of 550 g/L or less. C. Plastic-to-metal transition fittings: One-piece fitting with one threaded brass or copper insert and one solvent-cement-joint end of material and wall thickness to match plastic pipe material. 2.05 UNIONS AND FLANGES A. Unions for Pipe 2 inches and Smaller: 1. Ferrous Piping: Class 150 malleable iron, threaded. 2. Copper Piping: Class 150, bronze unions with soldered. 3. Dielectric Connections: a. Union with galvanized or plated steel threaded end, copper solder end, water impervious isolation barrier. b. Waterway fitting with zinc electroplated steel or ductile iron body, male thread, grooved, or plain end, water impervious isolation barrier. 4. PVC Piping: PVC. 5. Plastic-to-metal transition unions: Brass or copper end, solvent-cement-joint end of material and wall thickness to match plastic pipe material, rubber gasket, and threaded union. B. Flanges for Pipe 2-1/2 inches and Larger: 1. Ferrous Piping: a. Class 150 forged steel, slip-on flanges. b. Grooved joint flange adapter, flat face, for direct connection to ANSI Class 125 and 150 flanges. For direct connection to ANSI Class 300 flanges c. Flange Bolts and Nuts: ASME B18.2.1, carbon steel, unless otherwise indicated. 2. Copper Piping: a. Class 150, slip-on bronze flanges. b. Grooved joint flange adapter, flat face, for direct connection to ANSI Class 125 and 150 flanges. 3. PVC Piping: PVC flanges. 4. Gaskets: 1/16 inch thick preformed neoprene gaskets. C. PVC Pipe Materials: For connections to equipment and valves with threaded connections, furnish solvent-weld socket to screwed joint adapters and unions, or ASTM D2464, Schedule 80, threaded, PVC pipe. University of Connecticut HYDRONIC PIPING 23 2133 -6 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2.06 STEAM PIPING (ONLY) 2.07 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS A. Conform to ASME B31.9 and ASME B31.1 code for installation of piping system. B. Provide certificate of compliance from Authority Having Jurisdiction indicating approval of welders. C. Welding Materials and Procedures: Conform to ASME BPVC-IX and applicable state labor regulations. 2.08 MEDIUM AND HIGH PRESSURE STEAM PIPING (150 PSIG MAXIMUM) A. Steel Pipe Sizes 3” to 14”: ASTM A53, Schedule 80, black. 1. Fittings: ASME B16.3 malleable iron Class 250, or ASTM A234 wrought steel welding type. 2. Joints: Threaded, or AWS D1.1/D1.1M welded. B. Steel Pipe Sizes 16 Inch (400 mm) and Over: ASTM A53, 3/8 inch wall, black. 1. Fittings: ASTM A234 wrought steel welding type. 2. Joints: Welded in accordance with AWS D1.1. C. Copper Tube: ASTM B88 , Type M (C), drawn. 1. Fittings: ASME B16.18, cast brass, or ASME B16.22 wrought copper. 2. Joints: Braze, AWS A5.8M/A5.8, BCuP copper/silver alloy. 2.09 LOW PRESSURE STEAM PIPING (15 PSIG MAXIMUM) A. Steel Pipe Sizes 3” to 10”: ASTM A53, Schedule 40, black. 1. Fittings: ASME B16.3 malleable iron Class 125, or ASTM A234 wrought steel. 2. Joints: Threaded, or AWS D1.1 welded. B. Steel Pipe Sizes 12 Inch and Over: ASTM A53, 3/8 inch wall, black. 1. Fittings: ASTM A234 wrought steel. 2. Joints: Welded in accordance with AWS D1.1. C. Copper Tube: ASTM B88 , Type K (A), drawn. 1. Fittings: ASME B16.18, cast brass, or ASME B16.22 wrought copper. 2. Joints: Solder, lead free, ASTM B32, HB alloy (95-5 tin-antimony), or tin and silver. 2.10 MEDIUM AND HIGH PRESSURE STEAM CONDENSATE PIPING A. Steel Pipe Sizes 3” to 10”: ASTM A53, Schedule 80, black. 1. Fittings: ASME B16.3 malleable iron Class 125, or ASTM A234 wrought steel. 2. Joints: Threaded, or AWS D1.1 welded. B. Steel Pipe Sizes 12 Inch and Over: ASTM A53, 3/8 inch wall, black. 1. Fittings: ASTM A234 wrought steel. 2. Joints: Welded in accordance with AWS D1.1. C. Copper Tube: ASTM B88, Type L (B), drawn. 1. Fittings: ASME B16.18, cast brass, or ASME B16.22 wrought copper. 2. Joints: Solder, lead free, ASTM B32, HB alloy (95-5 tin-antimony), or tin and silver. 2.11 LOW PRESSURE STEAM CONDENSATE PIPING A. Steel Pipe Sizes 3” to 10”: ASTM A53, Schedule 80, black. University of Connecticut HYDRONIC PIPING 23 2133 -7 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1. Fittings: ASME B16.3 malleable iron Class 125, or ASTM A234 wrought steel. 2. Joints: Threaded, or AWS D1.1 welded. B. Steel Pipe Sizes 12 Inch and Over: ASTM A53/A53M, 3/8 inch wall, black. 1. Fittings: ASTM A234 wrought steel. 2. Joints: Welded in accordance with AWS D1.1. C. Copper Tube: ASTM B88 , Type L (B), drawn. 1. Fittings: ASME B16.18, cast brass, or ASME B16.22, wrought copper. 2. Joints: Solder, lead free, ASTM B32, HB alloy (95-5 tin-antimony), or tin and silver. 2.12 UNIONS, FLANGES, AND COUPLINGS A. Unions for Pipe 2 Inches and Under: 1. Ferrous Piping: 150 psig galvanized malleable iron, threaded. 2. Copper Pipe: Bronze, soldered joints. B. Flanges for Pipe Over 2 Inches : 1. Ferrous Piping: 150 psig forged steel, slip-on. 2. Copper Piping: Bronze. 3. Gaskets: 1/16 inch thick preformed non-asbestos graphite fiber. C. Dielectric Connections: Union with galvanized or plated steel threaded end, copper solder end, water impervious isolation barrier. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 PIPING APPLICATIONS A. Hot-water heating piping, above ground, 2-inch and smaller, shall be the following: 1. Type L (Type B), drawn-temper copper tubing, wrought-copper fittings, and soldered joints. 2. Type L (Type B), drawn-temper copper tubing, wrought-copper fittings, and press-seal joints [where exposed and where installed above accessible ceilings only]. B. Hot-water heating piping, above ground, 2-1/2 inch and larger shall be any of the following: 1. Type L (Type B), drawn-temper copper tubing, wrought-copper fittings, and soldered joints. 2. Type L (Type B), drawn-temper copper tubing, wrought-copper fittings, and press-seal joints where exposed and where installed above accessible ceilings only. 3. Schedule 40 steel pipe, wrought-steel fittings and wrought-cast or forged-steel flanges and flange fittings, and welded and flanged joints. 4. Schedule 40 steel pipe, grooved, mechanical joint coupling and fittings; and grooved, mechanical joints where exposed and where installed above accessible ceilings only. C. Condensate-Drain Piping: Type M, drawn-temper copper tubing, wrought-copper fittings, and soldered joints. D. Blowdown-Drain Piping: Same materials and joining methods as for piping specified for the service in which blowdown drain is installed. E. Air-Vent Piping: University of Connecticut HYDRONIC PIPING 23 2133 -8 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1. Inlet: Same as service where installed with metal-to-plastic transition fittings for plastic piping systems according to piping manufacturer's written instructions. 2. Outlet: Type K, annealed-temper copper tubing with soldered or flared joints. F. Safety-Valve-Inlet and -Outlet Piping for Hot-Water Piping: Same materials and joining methods as for piping specified for the service in which safety valve is installed with metal-to-plastic transition fittings for plastic piping systems according to piping manufacturer's written instructions. 3.02 EXAMINATION A. Verify excavations are to required grade, dry, and not over-excavated. 3.03 PREPARATION A. Ream pipe and tube ends. Remove burrs. Bevel or groove plain end ferrous pipe. B. Remove scale and dirt on inside and outside before assembly. C. Prepare piping connections to equipment with flanges or unions. D. Keep open ends of pipe free from scale and dirt. Protect open ends with temporary plugs or caps. E. After completion, fill, clean, and treat systems. Refer to Section 23 25 00. 3.04 INSTALLATION -PIPE HANGERS AND SUPPORTS A. Install pipe hangers and supports in accordance with Section 23 05 29. 3.05 INSTALLATION -ABOVE GROUND PIPING SYSTEMS A. Install Work in accordance with Owner’s guidelines. B. Route piping parallel to building structure and maintain gradient. C. Install piping to conserve building space, and not interfere with use of space. D. Group piping whenever practical at common elevations. E. Sleeve pipe passing through partitions, walls and floors. Refer to Section 23 05 29. F. Install firestopping at fire rated construction perimeters and openings containing penetrating sleeves and piping. G. Install pipe identification in accordance with Section 23 05 53. H. Install piping to allow for expansion and contraction without stressing pipe, joints, or connected equipment. I. Provide access where valves and fittings are not exposed. Coordinate size and location of access doors. J. Slope hydronic piping and arrange systems to drain at low points. K. Where pipe support members are welded to structural building framing, scrape, brush clean, and apply one coat of zinc rich primer to welds. L. Prepare unfinished pipe, fittings, supports, and accessories, ready for finish painting. Refer to Division 09. M. Install valves with stems upright or horizontal, not inverted. N. Insulate piping and equipment; refer to Section 23 07 00. 3.06 PIPE JOINT CONSTRUCTION University of Connecticut HYDRONIC PIPING 23 2133 -9 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 A. Ream ends of pipes and tubes and remove burrs. Bevel plain ends of steel pipe. B. Remove scale, slag, dirt, and debris from inside and outside of pipe and fittings before assembly. C. Soldered Joints: Apply ASTM B 813, water-flushable flux, unless otherwise indicated, to tube end. Construct joints according to ASTM B 828 or CDA's "Copper Tube Handbook," using lead-free solder alloy complying with ASTM B 32. D. Brazed Joints: Construct joints according to AWS's "Brazing Handbook," "Pipe and Tube" Chapter, using copper-phosphorus brazing filler metal complying with AWS A5.8/A5.8M. E. Threaded Joints: Thread pipe with tapered pipe threads according to ASME B1.20.1. Cut threads full and clean using sharp dies. Ream threaded pipe ends to remove burrs and restore full ID. Join pipe fittings and valves as follows: 1. Apply appropriate tape or thread compound to external pipe threads unless dry seal threading is specified. 2. Damaged Threads: Do not use pipe or pipe fittings with threads that are corroded or damaged. Do not use pipe sections that have cracked or open welds. F. Welded Joints: Construct joints according to AWS D10.12M/D10.12, using qualified processes and welding operators according to "Quality Assurance" Article. G. Flanged Joints: Select appropriate gasket material, size, type, and thickness for service application. Install gasket concentrically positioned. Use suitable lubricants on bolt threads. H. Grooved joint piping systems: Install in accordance with the manufacturer's guidelines and recommendations. 1. The gasket style and elastomeric material (grade) shall be verified as suitable for the intended service as specified. Gaskets shall be supplied by the grooved coupling manufacturer. Grooved end shall be clean and free from indentations, projections and roll marks in the area from pipe end to groove for proper gasket sealing. 2. A factory trained field representative shall provide on-site training to contractor's field personnel in the installation of grooved piping products. Factory trained representative shall periodically review the product installation. Contractor shall remove and replace any improperly installed products. 3. Use roll sets or cut groovers compatible with the pipe material and wall thickness per manufacturer’s installation instructions. I. Press connections: Copper and copper alloy press connections shall be made in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions. The tubing shall be fully inserted into the fitting and the tubing marked at the shoulder of the fitting. The fitting alignment shall be checked against the mark on the tubing to assure the tubing is fully engaged (inserted) in the fitting. The joints shall be pressed using the tool(s) recommended by the manufacturer. Contractor shall be trained on the use and installation of the system by manufacturer’s representative. 3.07 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Comply with Division 01. B. Prepare hydronic piping according to ASME B31.9 and as follows: University of Connecticut HYDRONIC PIPING 23 2133 -10 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1. Leave joints, including welds, uninsulated and exposed for examination during test. 2. Provide temporary restraints for expansion joints that cannot sustain reactions due to test pressure. If temporary restraints are impractical, isolate expansion joints from testing. 3. Flush hydronic piping systems with clean water; then remove and clean or replace strainer screens. 4. Isolate equipment from piping. If a valve is used to isolate equipment, its closure shall be capable of sealing against test pressure without damage to valve. Install blinds in flanged joints to isolate equipment. 5. Install safety valve, set at a pressure no more than one-third higher than test pressure, to protect against damage by expanding liquid or other source of overpressure during test. C. Perform the following tests on hydronic piping: 1. Use ambient temperature water as a testing medium unless there is risk of damage due to freezing. Another liquid that is safe for workers and compatible with piping may be used. 2. While filling system, use vents installed at high points of system to release air. Use drains installed at low points for complete draining of test liquid. 3. Isolate expansion tanks and determine that hydronic system is full of water. 4. Subject piping system to hydrostatic test pressure that is not less than 1.5 times the system's working pressure. Test pressure shall not exceed maximum pressure for any vessel, pump, valve, or other component in system under test. Verify that stress due to pressure at bottom of vertical runs does not exceed 90 percent of specified minimum yield strength or 1.7 times the "SE" value in Appendix A in ASME B31.9, "Building Services Piping." Pressure test for press-seal fittings shall not exceed 85 psi. If there is a significant drop in pressure, the system shall be walked to check for un-pressed fittings. Should an un-pressed fitting be located, the pressure should be released from the system and the un-pressed fitting shall be pressed. 5. After hydrostatic test pressure has been applied for at least 10 minutes, examine piping, joints, and connections for leakage. Eliminate leaks by tightening, repairing, or replacing components, and repeat hydrostatic test until there are no leaks. 6. Prepare written report of testing. D. Perform the following before operating the system: 1. Open manual valves fully. 2. Inspect pumps for proper rotation. 3. Set makeup pressure-reducing valves for required system pressure. 4. Inspect air vents at high points of system and determine if all are installed and operating freely (automatic type), or bleed air completely (manual type). 5. Set temperature controls so all coils are calling for full flow. 6. Inspect and set operating temperatures of hydronic equipment, such as boilers, chillers, cooling towers, to specified values. 7. Verify lubrication of motors and bearings. E. Test hydronic piping systems in accordance with ASME B31.9. University of Connecticut HYDRONIC PIPING 23 2133 -11 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 F. Pressure test to identify un-pressed fittings: Utilizing air or water, the system shall be pressurized, not to exceed 85 psi. If there is a significant drop in pressure, the system shall be walked to check for un-pressed fittings. Should an un-pressed fitting be located, the pressure should be released from the system and the un-pressed fitting shall be pressed. If no un-pressed fitting is identified the system shall be pressurized to test pressures required by code, not to exceed 600 psi. G. HANGERS AND SUPPORTS 1. Comply with requirements in Division 23 "Hangers and Supports for HVAC Piping and Equipment" for hanger, support, and anchor devices. Comply with the following requirements for maximum spacing of supports. PIPE SIZE Inches  COPPER TUBING MAXIMUM HANGER SPACING Feet  STEEL PIPE MAXIMUM HANGER SPACING Feet  COPPER TUBING HANGER ROD DIAMETER Inches  STEEL PIPE HANGER ROD DIAMETER Inches  1/2  5  7  3/8  3/8  3/4  5  7  3/8  3/8  1  6  7  3/8  3/8  1-1/4  7  7  3/8  3/8  1-1/2  8  9  3/8  3/8  2  8  10  3/8  3/8  2-1/2 (Note 1)  9  11  1/2  1/2  3  10  12  1/2  1/2  4  12  14  1/2  5/8  5  13  16  1/2  5/8  6  14  17  5/8  3/4  8  16  19  3/4  3/4  10  18  22  3/4  7/8  12  19  23  3/4  7/8  14  22  25  7/8  1  University of Connecticut HYDRONIC PIPING 23 2133 -12 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 16  23  27  7/8  1  18  25  28  1  1  20  27  30  1  1-1/4  24  28  32  1-1/4  1-1/4  H. Plastic and Ductile Iron Pipe Hanger Spacing: PIPE HANGER SPACING  PIPE MATERIAL  MAXIMUM HANGER SPACING Feet  HANGER ROD DIAMETER Inches  ABS (All sizes)  4  3/8  FRP (All Sizes)  4  3/8  Ductile Iron (Note 2)  PVC (All Sizes)  4  3/8  I. Note 1: Refer to manufacturer’s recommendations for grooved end piping systems. J. Note 2: 20 feet maximum spacing, minimum of one hanger for each pipe section close to joint behind bell. Provide hanger at each change of direction and each branch connection. For pipe sizes 6 inches and smaller, subjected to loadings other than weight of pipe and contents, limit span to maximum spacing for water service steel pipe. END OF SECTION University of Connecticut HYDRONIC SPECIALTIES 23 2114 -1 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 SECTION 23 2114 HYDRONIC SPECIALTIES PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Air vents. B. Pressure-temperature test plugs. C. Balancing valves. D. Combination flow controls. E. Flow meters. F. Radiator valves. G. Relief valves. H. Pressure reducing valves. I. Thermometers J. Pressure Gauges 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this section. B. Section 22 -Plumbing Piping Specialties: Backflow preventers. C. Section 23 -Hydronic Piping. D. Section 23 -HVAC Water Treatment: Pipe cleaning. 1.03 REFERENCE STANDARDS (FOLLOW THE MOST CURRENTLY ADOPTED AMENDED VERSION) A. ASME B16.1 -Gray Iron Pipe Flanges and Flanged Fittings: Classes 25, 125, and 250. B. ASME B16.5 -Pipe Flanges and Flanged Fittings NPS 1/2 Through NPS 24 Metric/Inch Standard. C. ASME B16.11 -Forged Fittings, Socket-welding and Threaded. D. ASME BPVC-VIII-1 -Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Section VIII, Division 1 -Rules for Construction of Pressure Vessels. 1.04 ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS A. Coordination: Coordinate the installation of work of this section with size, location and installation of service utilities. B. Preinstallation Meeting: Conduct a preinstallation meeting one week prior to the start of the work of this section; require attendance by all affected installers. C. Sequencing: Ensure that utility connections are achieved in an orderly and expeditious manner. 1.05 SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: Provide product data for manufactured products and assemblies required for this project. Include component sizes, rough-in requirements, service sizes, and finishes. Include product description and model. University of Connecticut HYDRONIC SPECIALTIES 23 2114 -2 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 B. Certificates: Inspection certificates for pressure vessels from authority having jurisdiction. C. Manufacturer's Installation Instructions: Indicate hanging and support methods, joining procedures. D. Maintenance Contract. E. Project Record Documents: Record actual locations of flow controls. F. Maintenance Data: Include installation instructions, assembly views, lubrication instructions, and replacement parts list. G. Maintenance Materials: Furnish the following for Owner's use in maintenance of project. 1. Differential Pressure Meter: For each type of balancing valve and automatic flow control valve, include flow meter, probes, hoses, flow charts, and carrying case. 1.06 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Manufacturer Qualifications: Company specializing in manufacturing the type of products specified in this section, with minimum three years of documented experience. 1.07 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Accept valves on site in shipping containers with labeling in place. Inspect for damage. B. Provide temporary protective coating on cast iron and steel valves. C. Provide temporary end caps and closures on piping and fittings. Maintain in place until installation. D. Protect piping systems from entry of foreign materials by temporary covers, completing sections of the work, and isolating parts of completed system. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 AIR VENTS A. Manufacturers: 1. Armstrong International, Inc. 2. ITT Bell & Gossett 3. Taco, Inc. B. Manual Type: Short vertical sections of 2 inch diameter pipe to form air chamber, with 1/8 inch brass needle valve at top of chamber. C. Float Type: 1. Brass or semi-steel body, copper, polypropylene, or solid non-metallic float, stainless steel valve and valve seat; suitable for system operating temperature and pressure; with isolating valve. 2. Cast iron body and cover, float, bronze pilot valve mechanism suitable for system operating temperature and pressure; with isolating valve. D. Washer Type: 1. Brass with hygroscopic fiber discs, vent ports, adjustable cap for manual shut-off, and integral spring loaded ball check valve. 2.02 STRAINERS University of Connecticut HYDRONIC SPECIALTIES 23 2114 -3 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 A. Manufacturers: 1. Armstrong International, Inc. 2. Watts 3. Grinnell Products B. Size 2 inch and Under: 1. Screwed brass or iron body for 175 psi working pressure, Y pattern with 1/32 inch stainless steel perforated screen. C. Size 2-1/2 inch to 4 inch: 1. Provide flanged iron body for 175 psi working pressure, Y pattern with 3/64 inch stainless steel perforated screen. D. Size 5 inch and Larger: 1. Provide flanged iron body for 175 psi working pressure, basket pattern with 1/8 inch stainless steel perforated screen. 2.03 PRESSURE-TEMPERATURE TEST PLUGS A. Manufacturers: 1. Ferguson Enterprises Inc 2. Peterson Equipment Company Inc 3. Sisco Manufacturing Company Inc 4. Substitutions: See Section 01 -Product Requirements. B. Construction: Brass body designed to receive temperature or pressure probe with removable protective cap, and Neoprene rated for minimum 200 degrees F . C. Application: Use extended length plugs to clear insulated piping. 2.04 BALANCING VALVES -MANUAL A. Manufacturers: 1. Armstrong Fluid Technology 2. ITT Bell & Gossett 3. Taco, Inc 4. Nexus 5. Grisworld 6. Tour & Anderson B. Brass or Bronze, Calibrated-Orifice, Balancing Valves: 1. Construction: Bronze or brass alloy housing, ball or plug type with calibrated orifice or venturi. The valve shall come fully assembled and be permanently marked to show direction of flow. 2. CWP rating: 400PSI/250.F. 3. Pressure gauge connections: dual pressure/temperature test valves for flow reading, and a union end which will accept various end pieces. 4. The body design shall allow inspection or repair of handle operated stem without disturbing piping connections. The repairable stem shall include two Teflon seals and one EPDM O-ring for protection against chemicals and modulating temperature. C. Cast-Iron or Steel, Calibrated-Orifice, Balancing Valves: 1. Body: Cast-iron or steel body, ball, plug, or globe pattern with calibrated orifice or venturi. University of Connecticut HYDRONIC SPECIALTIES 23 2114 -4 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2. Ball: Brass or stainless steel. 3. Stem Seals: EPDM O-rings. 4. Disc: Manufacturer standard construction. 5. Seat: PTFE. 6. End Connections: Flanged or grooved. 7. Pressure Gauge Connections: Integral seals for portable differential pressure meter. 8. Handle Style: Lever, with memory stop to retain set position. 9. CWP Rating: Minimum 125 psig 860 kPa. 10. Maximum Operating Temperature: 250 deg F 121 deg C. 2.05 BALANCING VALVES AUTOMATIC A. Manufacturers: 1. Nexus UltraMatic UM Series 2. Grisworld Isolator R Series 3. Flow Design AC Series 4. Victaulic 76B Series B. Description: 1. Brass or bronze body with union on inlet and outlet, temperature and pressure test plug on inlet and outlet with combination blow-down and back-flush drain. 2. Calibration: Control within 10 percent of design flow over entire operating pressure with a maximum operating temperature of at least 232 deg F. 3. Control Mechanism: Either piston and spring or diaphragm and orifice plates are acceptable types. For piston and spring types: Stainless steel or nickel plated brass piston or regulator cup, operating against stainless steel helical or wave formed spring. For diaphragm and orifice plate types: elastomeric polymer diaphragm with polyphenylsulfone orifice seat. 4. Accessories: In-line strainer on inlet and ball valve on outlet. 5. Manufacturer shall be able to provide certified independent laboratory tests verifying accuracy of performance. (Consult the factory for details). 6. All flow control valve cartridges shall be warranted by the manufacturer for five years from date of sale. 7. The body design shall allow inspection or removal of 20 mesh stainless steel strainer without disturbing piping connections. 8. Ball Valve shall be made of brass. Maximum pressure rating of 400 PSI. Ball Valve shall include a union end which will accept various end pieces. 9. The body design shall allow inspection or repair of handle operated stem without disturbing piping connections. The repairable stem shall include two Teflon seals and one EPDM O-ring for protection against chemicals and modulating temperature. 10. A pressure/temperature test valve, manual air vent and drain valve shall be included. 11. Dual pressure or pressure/temperature test valves for verifying accuracy of flow performance shall be provided for all valve sizes. 12. Valve shall have a body tag to indicate model number and a hanging tag showing Cv and flow/delta P reading required for specific flow rate. 2.06 COMBINATION FLOW CONTROLS University of Connecticut HYDRONIC SPECIALTIES 23 2114 -5 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 A. Manufacturers: 1. Armstrong Fluid Technology 2. ITT Bell & Gossett 3. Taco, Inc 4. Nexus 5. Grisworld B. Size 2 inch and Under: 1. 300 psi, threaded or soldered ends; non-ferrous Ametal® brass copper alloy body, EPDM o-ring seals. 4-turn digital readout handwheel for balancing, hidden memory feature with locking tamper-proof setting. Victaulic / TA Hydronics Series 787, 78K STAD or 786 STAS. C. Size 2-1/2 inch and Larger: 1. 250 psi Flanged or 350 psi Grooved ends, ASTM A536 ductile iron body, all other metal parts of Ametal® brass copper alloy, EPDM O-ring seals. 8, 12 or 16 turn digital readout handwheel for balancing, hidden memory feature with locking tamper-proof setting. Victaulic / TA Hydronics Series 789 STAG or 788 STAF 2. Coil hook-up assemblies may be used to reduce installation time and space requirements. Victaulic TA Series 799 or 79V Koil Kit coil pack assembly. Coil pack can include; Victaulic Series 78U union port fitting, Series 78Y strainer/ball valve or Series 78T union/ball valve combination, and two flexible hoses 2.07 FLOW METERS (STAND-ALONE TYPE) REFER TO 230900 FOR BAS FLOW METERS A. Manufacturers: 1. Dwyer Instruments, Inc 2. EMCO Flow Systems 3. Davis Instruments B. Orifice principle by-pass circuit with direct reading gauge, soldered or flanged piping connections for 125 psi working pressure, with shut off valves, and drain and vent connections. C. Direct reading with insert pitot tube, threaded coupling, for 150 psi working pressure, maximum 240 degrees F, 5 percent accuracy. D. Cast iron, wafer type, orifice insert flow meter for 250 psi working pressure, with read-out valves equipped with integral check valves with gasketed caps. E. Calibrated, plug type balance valve with precision machined orifice, readout valves equipped with integral check valves and gasketed caps, calibrated nameplate and indicating pointer. F. Cast iron or bronze, globe style, balance valve with handwheel with vernier type ring setting and memory stop, drain connection, readout valves equipped with integral check valves and gasketed caps. G. Portable meter consisting of case containing one, 3 percent accuracy pressure gauge with 0-60 feet pressure range for 500 psi maximum working pressure, color coded hoses for low and high pressure connections, and connectors suitable for connection to read-out valves. H. Portable meter consisting of case containing two, 3 percent accuracy pressure gauges with 0-135 inches and 0-60 feet pressure ranges for 500 psi maximum working University of Connecticut HYDRONIC SPECIALTIES 23 2114 -6 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 pressure, color coded hoses for low and high pressure connections, and connectors suitable for connection to read-out valves. 2.08 RADIATOR VALVES A. Manufacturers: 1. Armstrong International, Inc 2. ITT Bell & Gossett 3. Danfos 4. Watts B. Angle or straight pattern, rising stem, inside screw globe valve for 125 psi working pressure, with bronze body and integral union for screwed connections, renewable composition disc, plastic wheel handle for shut-off service, and lockshield key cap and set screw memory bonnet for balancing service. 2.09 DIAPHRAGM-OPERATED SAFETY VALVES: ASME LABELED. A. Manufacturers: 1. AMTROL, Inc. 2. Armstrong Pumps, Inc. 3. Bell & Gossett Domestic Pump. 4. Conbraco Industries, Inc. 5. Spence Engineering Company, Inc. 6. Watts Regulator Co. B. Construction: 1. Body: Bronze or brass. 2. Disc: Glass and carbon-filled PTFE. 3. Seat: Brass. 4. Stem Seals: EPDM O-rings. 5. Diaphragm: EPT. 6. Wetted, Internal Work Parts: Brass and rubber. 7. Inlet Strainer: 304 or 316 stainless steel, removable without system shutdown. 8. Valve Seat and Stem: Noncorrosive. C. Valve Size, Capacity, and Operating Pressure: Comply with ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code: Section IV, and selected to suit system in which installed, with operating pressure and capacity factory set and field adjustable. 2.10 PRESSURE REDUCING VALVES A. Manufacturers: 1. Armstrong International, Inc 2. ITT Bell & Gossett 3. Taco, Inc 4. Watts B. Operation: Automatically feeds make-up water to the hydronic system whenever pressure in the system drops below the pressure setting of the valve. Refer to Section 23 2113. C. Construction 1. Valve Body: Constructed of bronze, cast iron, brass, iron 2. Disc: Glass and carbon-filled PTFE. University of Connecticut HYDRONIC SPECIALTIES 23 2114 -7 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 3. Seat: Brass. 4. Stem Seals: EPDM O-rings. 5. Diaphragm: EPT. D. Provide integral check valve and strainer. E. Maximum Inlet Pressure: 100 psi (689 kPa). F. Maximum Fluid Temperature: 180 degrees F (82 degrees C). G. Operating Pressure Range: Between 10 psi (69 kPa) and 25 psi (172 kPa). 2.11 THERMOMETERS A. Manufacturers: 1. Trerice 2. Winters 3. Weiss B. Thermometer: ASTM E1, adjustable angle, red appearing mercury, lens front tube, cast aluminum case with enamel finish, cast aluminum adjustable joint with positive locking device. 1. Size: Minimum 7 inch scale. 2. Window: Clear glass or Lexan. 3. Stem: Aluminum or Brass, length to suit installation. 4. Accuracy: ASTM E77 2 percent. 5. Calibration: Degrees F, or both degrees F and degrees C. 2.12 THERMOMETER SUPPORTS A. Socket: Brass separable sockets for thermometer stems with or without extensions, and with cap and chain]. B. Flange: 3 inch outside diameter reversible flange, designed to fasten to sheet metal air ducts, with brass perforated stem. 2.13 PRESSURE GAUGES A. Manufacturers: 1. Trerice 2. Winters 3. Weiss B. Gauge: ASME B40.1, with bourdon tube, rotary brass movement, brass socket, front calibration adjustment, black scale on white background. 1. Case: Sealed types, Aluminum or Stainless steel. 2. Movement: Mechanical, with link to pressure element and connection to pointer. 3. Dial Size: Minimum 4-1/2 inch diameter. 4. Mid-Scale Accuracy: Grade A, plus or minus one percent. 5. Scale: Psi, or both psi and kPa. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 INSTALLATION – HYDRONIC PIPING SPECIALTIES A. Install specialties in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. University of Connecticut HYDRONIC SPECIALTIES 23 2114 -8 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 B. Install thermowells of sizes required to match thermometer connectors. Include bushings if required to match sizes. Install thermowells with extension on insulated piping. Fill thermowells with heat-transfer medium. C. Install gauges and thermometers in locations where they are easily read from normal operating level. D. Install direct-mounted thermometers in thermowells and adjust vertical and tilted positions. E. Install duct-thermometer mounting brackets in walls of ducts. Attach to duct with screws. F. Install direct-mounted pressure gauges in piping tees with pressure gauge located on pipe at the most readable position. Install valve and snubber in piping for each pressure gauge for fluids (except steam). G. Install thermowells with socket extending one-third of pipe diameter or to center of pipe and in vertical position in piping tees. H. Where large air quantities can accumulate, provide enlarged air collection standpipes. I. Provide manual air vents at system high points and as indicated. J. For automatic air vents in ceiling spaces or other concealed locations, provide vent tubing to nearest drain. K. Provide valved drain and hose connection on strainer blow down connection. L. Support pump fittings with floor mounted pipe and flange supports. M. Provide radiator valves on water inlet to terminal heating units such as radiation, unit heaters, and fan coil units. N. Provide radiator balancing valves on water outlet from terminal heating units such as radiation, unit heaters, and fan coil units. O. Perform tests determining strength of glycol and water solution and submit written test results. 3.02 INSTALLATION -THERMOMETERS AND GAUGES A. Install one pressure gauge for each pump, locate taps before strainers and on suction and discharge of pump; pipe to gauge. B. Install pressure gauges with pulsation dampers. Provide needle valve or ball valve to isolate each gauge. Extend nipples to allow clearance from insulation. C. Install thermometers in piping systems in sockets in short couplings. Enlarge pipes smaller than 2-1/2 inches for installation of thermometer sockets. Allow clearance from insulation. D. Install thermometer sockets adjacent to controls systems thermostat, transmitter, or sensor sockets. E. Coil and conceal excess capillary on remote element instruments. F. Provide instruments with scale ranges selected according to service with largest appropriate scale. G. Install gauges and thermometers in locations where they are easily read from normal operating level. Install vertical to 45 degrees off vertical. University of Connecticut HYDRONIC SPECIALTIES 23 2114 -9 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 H. Adjust gauges and thermometers to final angle, clean windows and lenses, and calibrate to zero. 3.03 THERMOMETER SCALE RANGE SCHEDULE A. Scale Range for Heating, Hot-Water Piping: 20 to 240 deg F B. Scale Range for Air Ducts: 0 to 150 deg F 3.04 PRESSURE GAUGE SCALE RANGE SCHEDULE A. Scale Range for Heating, Hot-Water Piping: 0 to 200 3.05 MAINTENANCE A. Provide service and maintenance of glycol system for one year from date of Substantial Completion at no extra charge to Owner. B. Perform monthly visit to make glycol fluid concentration analysis on site with refractive index measurement instrument. Report findings in writing. C. Explain corrective actions to Owner's maintenance personnel in person. END OF SECTION University of Connecticut HYDRONIC PUMPS 23 2123 - 1 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 SECTION 23 2123 HYDRONIC PUMPS PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. System lubricated circulators. B. In-line circulators. C. Vertical in-line pumps. D. Close-coupled pumps. E. Base-mounted pumps. 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this section. B. Division 03 - Cast-in-Place Concrete related sections. C. Section 23 0548 - Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC Piping and Equipment. D. Section 23 0700 - HVAC Insulation. E. Section 23 2113 - Hydronic Piping. F. Section 23 2114 - Hydronic Specialties. G. Section 26 0503 - Equipment Wiring Connections. 1.03 REFERENCE STANDARDS (FOLLOW THE MOST CURRENTLY ADOPTED AMENDED VERSION) A. NEMA MG 1 - Motors and Generators B. NEMA OS 1 - Sheet-Steel Outlet Boxes, Device Boxes, Covers, and Box Supports. C. NFPA 70 - National Electrical Code. D. UL 778 - Standard for Motor-Operated Water Pumps. E. NEMA 250- Enclosures for Electrical Equipment (1000 Volts Maximum) 1.04 SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: Provide certified pump curves showing performance characteristics with pump and system operating point plotted.  Include NPSH curve when applicable.  Include electrical characteristics and connection requirements. Submit also, manufacturer model number, dimensions, service clearances and finishes. B. Millwright's Certificate:  Certify that base mounted pumps have been aligned. C. Manufacturer's Installation Instructions:  Indicate hanging and support requirements and recommendations. D. Operation and Maintenance Data:  Include installation instructions, assembly views, lubrication instructions, and replacement parts list. E. Maintenance Materials:  Furnish the following for Owner's use in maintenance of project. 1. See Division 01 - General Requirements. 2. Extra Pump Seals:  (1) for each type and size of pump. 3. Extra Cartridges for Side-Stream Filters:  One set for each filter. 1.05 QUALITY ASSURANCE University of Connecticut HYDRONIC PUMPS 23 2123 - 2 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 A. Manufacturer Qualifications:  Company specializing in manufacture, assembly, and field performance of pumps, with minimum three years of documented experience. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 MANUFACTURERS A. Bell & Gossett. B. Grundfos. C. Taco Inc. D. Substitutions: Not allowed. 2.02 HVAC PUMPS - GENERAL A. Provide pumps that operate at specified system fluid temperatures without vapor binding and cavitation, are non-overloading in parallel or individual operation, and operate within 25 percent of midpoint of published maximum efficiency curve. B. Minimum Quality Standard:  UL 778. C. Base Mounted Pumps:  Aligned by qualified millwright. D. Products Requiring Electrical Connection:  Listed and classified by UL or testing agency acceptable to Authority Having Jurisdiction as suitable for the purpose specified and indicated. 2.03 SYSTEM LUBRICATED CIRCULATORS A. Type: Horizontal shaft, single stage, direct connected with multiple speed wet rotor motor for in-line mounting, for 140 psig maximum working pressure, 230°F maximum water temperature. B. Casing:  Cast iron with flanged pump connections. C. Impeller, Shaft, Rotor:  Stainless Steel. D. Bearings:  Metal Impregnated carbon (graphite) and ceramic. E. Motor: Impedance protected, multiple speed, with external speed selector. F. Performance & Electrical Characteristics: See Pump Schedule on drawings. 2.04 IN-LINE CIRCULATORS A. Type: Horizontal shaft, single stage, direct connected, with resiliently mounted motor for in-line mounting, oil lubricated, for 125 psig maximum working pressure unless otherwise indicated on the pump schedule. B. Casing:  Cast iron, with flanged pump connections. C. Impeller:  Non-ferrous keyed to shaft. D. Bearings:  Oil-lubricated bronze sleeve. E. Shaft: Alloy steel with bronze sleeve, integral thrust collar. F. Seal: Mechanical seal, 225°F maximum continuous operating temperature unless otherwise indicated on the pump schedule. G. Drive: Flexible coupling. H. Performance & Electrical Characteristics: See Pump Schedule on drawings. I. Electrical Characteristics: University of Connecticut HYDRONIC PUMPS 23 2123 - 3 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1. Wiring Terminations:  Provide terminal lugs to match branch circuit conductor quantities, sizes, and materials indicated.  Enclose terminal lugs in terminal box sized to NFPA 70. 2.05 VERTICAL IN-LINE PUMPS A. Type: Vertical, single stage, close coupled, radially or horizontally split casing, for in-line mounting, for 175 psi working pressure unless otherwise indicated on the pump schedule. B. Casing:  Cast iron, with suction and discharge gage port, casing wear ring, seal flush connection, drain plug, flanged suction and discharge. C. Impeller:  Bronze, fully enclosed, keyed directly to motor shaft or extension. D. Shaft: Carbon steel with stainless steel impeller cap screw or nut and bronze sleeve. E. Seal: Mechanical seal, 225°F maximum continuous operating temperature unless otherwise indicated on the pump schedule. F. Performance & Electrical Characteristics: See Pump Schedule on drawings. G. Electrical Characteristics: 1. Wiring Terminations:  Provide terminal lugs to match branch circuit conductor quantities, sizes, and materials indicated.  Enclose terminal lugs in terminal box sized to NFPA 70. 2.06 CLOSE COUPLED PUMPS A. Type: Horizontal shaft, single stage, close coupled, radially split casing, for 125 psi maximum working pressure unless otherwise indicated on the pump schedule. B. Casing:  Cast iron, with suction and discharge gage ports, renewable bronze casing wearing rings, seal flush connection, drain plug, flanged suction and discharge. C. Impeller:  Bronze, fully enclosed, keyed to motor shaft extension. D. Shaft: Stainless steel. E. Seal: Mechanical seal, 225°F maximum continuous operating temperature unless otherwise indicated on the pump schedule. F. Performance & Electrical Characteristics: See Pump Schedule on drawings. 1. Wiring Terminations:  Provide terminal lugs to match branch circuit conductor quantities, sizes, and materials indicated.  Enclose terminal lugs in terminal box sized to NFPA 70. 2.07 BASE-MOUNTED PUMPS A. Type: Horizontal shaft, single stage, direct connected, radially or horizontally split casing, for 125 psi maximum working pressure unless otherwise indicated on the pump schedule. B. Casing:  Cast iron, with suction and discharge gage ports, renewable bronze casing wearing rings, seal flush connection, drain plug, flanged suction and discharge. C. Impeller:  Bronze, fully enclosed, keyed to shaft. D. Bearings:  Oil lubricated roller or ball bearings. E. Shaft: Alloy steel with copper, bronze, or stainless steel shaft sleeve. F. Seal: Mechanical seal, 225°F maximum continuous operating temperature unless otherwise indicated on the pump schedule. University of Connecticut HYDRONIC PUMPS 23 2123 - 4 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 G. Drive: Flexible coupling with coupling guard. H. Baseplate:  Cast iron or fabricated steel with integral drain rim. I. Performance & Electrical Characteristics: See Pump Schedule on drawings. 1. Wiring Terminations:  Provide terminal lugs to match branch circuit conductor quantities, sizes, and materials indicated.  Enclose terminal lugs in terminal box sized to NFPA 70. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 PREPARATION A. Verify that electric power is available and of the correct characteristics. 3.02 INSTALLATION A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Provide access space around pumps for service. Provide no less than minimum space recommended by manufacturer. C. Provide pumps to operate at specified system fluid temperatures without vapor binding and cavitation. Pumps shall be non-overloading where indicated on the pump schedule. D. ,[Provide separate inlet and outlet shut-off valves. See 23 2114 for valve kits for system lubricated circulators]. E. Full Line size is the piping size shown on the drawings for the inlet and outlet of each pump and is NOT the pump inlet and outlet connection size. F. Provide full line size isolation valve, pressure gauge, strainer and flex connector on inlet of all pumps.  Provide full line size flex connector, check valve, balance valve, pressure gauge and isolation valve on outlet of all pumps.  These items are to be provided for all cases whether indicated on not.  Provide pipe reducer on outlet to connect full line size to pump outlet size.  Balance valve on VFD driven pumps are not required.  Provide pump suction diffuser on all base mounted pumps.  See valve section for specific valve requirements. G. Provide air cock and drain connection on horizontal pump casings. H. Provide drains for bases and seals, piped to and discharging into floor drains. I. Check, align, and certify alignment of base-mounted pumps prior to start-up. J. Install close-coupled and base-mounted pumps on concrete housekeeping base, with anchor bolts, set and level, and grout in place.  Refer to Division 03 concrete related sections. K. Lubricate pumps before start-up. END OF SECTION University of Connecticut STEAM AND CONDENSATE HEATING SPECIALTIES 23 2214 -1 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 SECTION 23 2214 STEAM AND CONDENSATE HEATING SPECIALTIES PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Steam traps. B. Steam air vents. C. Steam Valves D. Flash tanks. E. Pressure reducing valves. F. Steam safety valves. G. Steam meters. 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this section. B. Section 23 0700 -HVAC Insulation. C. Section 23 2213 -Steam and Condensate Heating Piping. D. Section 26 2717 -Equipment Wiring: Electrical characteristics and wiring connections. 1.03 REFERENCE STANDARDS (FOLLOW THE MOST CURRENTLY ADOPTED AMENDED VERSION) A. ASME BPVC-VIII-1 -Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Section VIII, Division 1 -Rules for Construction of Pressure Vessels B. ASME B31.9 -Building Services Piping. C. ASTM A105/A105M -Standard Specification for Carbon Steel Forgings for Piping Applications. D. ASTM A126 -Standard Specification for Gray Iron Castings for Valves, Flanges, and Pipe Fittings. E. ASTM A216/A216M -Standard Specification for Steel Castings, Carbon, Suitable for Fusion Welding, for High-Temperature Service. F. ASTM A395/A395M -Standard Specification for Ferritic Ductile Iron Pressure-Retaining Castings for Use at Elevated Temperatures. G. NEMA 250 -Enclosures for Electrical Equipment (1000 Volts Maximum) 1.04 SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: 1. Provide for manufactured products and assemblies required for this project. 2. Include product description, model, dimensions, component sizes, rough-in requirements, service sizes, and finishes. 3. Submit schedule indicating manufacturer, model number, size, location, rated capacity, load served, and features for each specialty. 4. Include electrical characteristics and connection requirements. University of Connecticut STEAM AND CONDENSATE HEATING SPECIALTIES 23 2214 -2 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 B. Manufacturer's Installation Instructions: Indicate application, selection, and hookup configuration. Include pipe and accessory elevations. C. Operation and Maintenance Data: Include installation instructions, servicing requirements and recommended spare parts lists. D. Maintenance Materials: Furnish the following for Owner's use in maintenance of project. 1. Steam Trap Service Kits: One for each type and size. 1.05 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Perform Work in accordance with State where the project is located and all local authorities having jurisdiction for installation of boilers and pressure vessels. 1. Maintain one copy of each document on site. B. Manufacturer Qualifications: Company specializing in manufacturing the types of products specified in this section, with minimum three years of documented experience. C. Products Requiring Electrical Connection: Listed and classified by UL as suitable for the purpose indicated. 1.06 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Accept valves on site in shipping containers with labeling in place. Inspect for damage. B. Provide temporary protective coating on cast iron and steel valves. C. Provide temporary end caps and closures on piping and fittings. Maintain in place until installation. D. Protect piping systems from entry of foreign materials by temporary covers, completing sections of the work, and isolating parts of completed system. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 STEAM TRAPS A. Manufacturers: 1. Armstrong International, Inc 2. Spirax-Sarco 3. Watson McDaniel 4. Marshall Engineered Products Company B. Steam Trap Applications (unless shown on details otherwise): 1. Use Thermostatic Steam Traps for: a. Steam radiation units. b. Convectors. c. Unit ventilators. d. Unit heaters. e. Other similar terminal heating units. 2. Use Float and Thermostatic Traps for: a. Converters. b. Heating coils. c. Steam separators. d. Flash tanks. University of Connecticut STEAM AND CONDENSATE HEATING SPECIALTIES 23 2214 -3 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 e. Steam jacketed equipment. f. Direct steam injected equipment. g. Deaerators. h. Absorption chillers. i. Process equipment. j. Branch lines. 3. Use Inverted Bucket Steam Traps for: a. Main headers. C. Steam Trap Performance: 1. Select to handle minimum of two times maximum condensate load of apparatus served. 2. Pressure Differentials: a. Low Pressure Systems (5 psi and less): 1/4 psi. b. Low Pressure Systems (5 psi and less): 1/2 psi. c. Low Pressure Systems (15 psi maximum): 2 psi. d. Medium Pressure Steam (25 psi maximum): 5 psi. e. Medium Pressure Steam (40 psi maximum): 10 psi. f. Medium Pressure Steam (60 psi maximum): 15 psi. g. High Pressure Steam (100 psi maximum): 30 psi. h. High Pressure Steam (150 psi maximum): 40 psi. D. Inverted Bucket Traps: ASTM A126, cast iron or semi-steel body with bolted cover, brass bucket, stainless steel seats and plungers, and stainless steel lever mechanism with knife edge operating surfaces. 1. Rating: As Indicated on plans. 2. Features: Access to internal parts without disturbing piping, top test plug, bottom drain plugs. 3. Accessories: a. Integral inlet strainer of brass. b. Integral inlet check valve. c. Integral bimetal air vent. E. Float and Thermostatic Traps: ASTM A126 cast iron or semi-steel body and bolted cover, stainless steel or bronze bellows type air vent, stainless steel or copper float, stainless steel lever and valve assembly 1. Rating: As Indicated on plans. 2. Features: Access to internal parts without disturbing piping, bottom drain plug. 3. Accessories: Gage glass with shut-off cocks. F. Pressure Balanced Thermostatic Traps: ASTM A395/A395M cast iron body and bolted or screwed cover and integral ball joint union for 125 psi WSP; phosphor bronze bellows, stainless steel valve and seat, integral stainless steel strainer. G. Freeze Proof Thermostatic Traps: Cast iron body for 300 psi WSP, bronze bellows, stainless steel valve and seat, external adjustment. 2.02 STEAM AIR VENTS A. Manufacturers: 1. Armstrong International, Inc 2. Bell and Gossett University of Connecticut STEAM AND CONDENSATE HEATING SPECIALTIES 23 2214 -4 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 3. Spirax-Sarco 4. Watson McDaniel B. 125 psi WSP: Balanced pressure type; cast brass body and cover; access to internal parts without disturbing piping; stainless steel bellows, stainless steel valve and seat. C. 225 psi WSP: Balanced pressure type; ASTM A126 cast iron body and cover; access to internal parts without disturbing piping; phosphor bronze bellows, stainless steel valve and seat. 2.03 STEAM VALVES A. See Drawings for specific valve locations. B. Manufacturers: 1. Quadex 2. Watts 3. Vannesa 4. Substitutions: Not allowed C. Provide the following valves for the applications if not indicated on Drawings: 1. Throttling (Steam): Butterfly, Gate, 2. Isolation (Shutoff): Butterfly, Gate, Ball, Plug. D. Substitutions of valves with higher CWP classes or SWP ratings for same valve types are permitted when specified CWP ratings or SWP classes are not available. E. Low Pressure Steam Valves (15 PSIG or Less): 1. 2 NPS and Smaller, Brass, Bronze Valves: a. Angle: Bronze disc, Class 125. b. Ball: Full port, one piece, brass trim, extended stem. c. Swing Check: Bronze disc, Class 125. d. Gate: NRS, Class 125. e. Globe: Bronze disc, Class 125. 2. 2-1/2 NPS and Larger, Iron Valves: a. 2-1/2 NPS to 4 NPS: Threaded or Flanged ends. b. Ball: 2-1/2 NPS to 10 NPS, Class 150. c. Butterfly: Stainless steel, triple offset, High performance, single flange, Class 150. d. Swing Check: Metal seats, Class 125. e. Swing Check: 2-1/2 NPS to 12 NPS, lever and spring closure. control, Class 125. f. Gate: NRS, Class 125. g. Globe: 2-1/2 NPS to 12 NPS: Class 125. F. High Pressure Steam Valves (Greater than 15 PSIG (104 KPA): 1. 2 NPS (50 DN) and Smaller, Brass, Bronze Valves: a. Angle: Bronze disc, Class 125. b. Ball: Full port, one piece, brass trim. c. Swing Check: Bronze disc, Class 125. d. Gate: NRS, Class 125. e. Globe: Bronze disc, Class 125. 2. 2-1/2 NPS and Larger, Iron Valves: University of Connecticut STEAM AND CONDENSATE HEATING SPECIALTIES 23 2214 -5 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 a. 2-1/2 NPS to 4 NPS: Threaded or Flanged ends. b. Ball: 2-1/2 NPS to 10 NPS, Class 150. c. Butterfly: High performance, single flange, Class 150. d. Swing Check: Metal seats, Class 125. e. Swing Check: 2-1/2 NPS to 12 NPS, lever and spring closure control, Class 125. f. Gate: NRS, Class 125. g. Globe: 2-1/2 NPS to 12 NPS, Class 125. G. Steam-Condensate Valves: 1. 2 NPS and Smaller, Brass, Bronze Valves: a. Gate: NRS, RS, and ___, Class 125. b. Ball: Full port, one piece, brass trim. c. Angle: Bronze disc, Class 150. d. Globe: Bronze disc, Class 125. 2. 2-1/2 NPS and Larger, Iron Valves: a. Provide 2-1/2 NPS to 4 NPS with Threaded or Flanged ends. b. Ball: 2-1/2 NPS to 10 NPS, Class 150. c. Butterfly: High performance, single flange, Class 300. d. Swing Check: Metal seats, Class 125. e. Swing Check: Lever and spring closure control, Class 125. f. Gate: NRS, Class 125. g. Globe: 2-1/2 NPS to 12 NPS, Class 125. h. Lubricated Plug: Threaded, cylindrical, threaded, Class 125. 2.04 FLASH TANKS A. Manufacturers: 1. Armstrong International Inc. 2. Penn Separator Corporation. 3. Wessels Company B. Tank: Closed type, welded steel construction, cleaned, prime coated, and supplied with steel support legs. 1. Tested and stamped in accordance with ASME BPVC-VIII-1. 2. Working Pressure: As indicated on plan. 3. Construct with nozzles and tappings for installation of accessories and piping connections. 2.05 PRESSURE REDUCING VALVES A. Manufacturers: 1. Armstrong International, Inc 2. McDonnell & Miller, a xylem brand 3. Spirax-Sarco B. Bronze or cast iron body, stainless or chrome steel valve spring, stem, and trim, phosphor bronze diaphragm, direct acting, threaded up to 2 inches; flanged over 2 inches. 2.06 SAFETY RELIEF VALVES A. Manufacturers: University of Connecticut STEAM AND CONDENSATE HEATING SPECIALTIES 23 2214 -6 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1. Armstrong International, Inc 2. ITT McDonnell & Miller, a xylem brand 3. Spirax-Sarco B. Valve: Bronze body, stainless steel valve spring, stem, and trim, direct pressure actuated, capacities ASME certified and labelled. C. Accessories: Drip pan elbow. 2.07 STEAM METERS A. Steam Meter Manufacturers: 1. Veris (Differential Pressure – Accelabar) 2. Substitutions not allowed B. Steam Meter Transmitters Manufacturers: 1. Rosemount 2. Autrol 3. Siemens 4. Substitutions not allowed C. Steam Mass Flow Computer 1. Acceptable Manufacturers: a. KEP (Model ES762) b. Rosemount c. Yokogawa 2. Provide a steam flow computer to be installed inside an instrumentation enclosure to calculate steam mass flow rate (lbs/hour) and accumulated thermal energy (energy units will be in lbs). The steam flow computer will be programmed following manufacturer’s instructions based on a building’s steam design capacity and steam pipe size. The flow computer shall be programmed in “Saturated Steam” mode only requiring temperature compensation for the calculation unless the meter is in close proximity to a steam tunnel in which case the flow computer must be programmed in “Super-Heated Steam” mode utilizing both temperature and pressure compensation for the calculation. 3. Provide the following accessories: a. 24 VDC power supply b. Surge protection c. Modbus/TCP communication device d. 120 VAC power source disconnect switch e. Ethernet cable to connect communication device to IT data jack port. D. Steam utility service sub-meters shall be installed at the building service entrance and will utilize differential pressure technology at a serviceable location preferably not to exceed 6 feet above the ground as measured from the top of the meter assembly. E. In-line meters shall be installed at the building service entrance locations. Insertion type meters are not acceptable for steam metering of utility services at the building service entrance. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 INSTALLATION University of Connecticut STEAM AND CONDENSATE HEATING SPECIALTIES 23 2214 -7 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 A. Install steam and steam condensate piping and specialties in accordance with ASME B31.9. B. Install specialties in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. C. Steam Traps: 1. Provide minimum 3/4 inch size on steam mains and branches. 2. Install with union or flanged connections at both ends. 3. Provide gate valve and strainer at inlet, and gate valve and check valve at discharge. 4. Provide minimum 10 inch long, line size dirt pocket between apparatus and trap. D. Steam Meters: 1. Steam meters shall be installed at a serviceable location not greater than 6 feet above finished floor. 2. For horizontal steam pipe meter installations, the meter differential transmitter shall be installed below the steam line. 3. For vertical steam pipe configurations, the meter differential transmitter can be mounted in any location around the circumference of the pipe but requires a special adapter manifold to allow for “water head”. 4. If possible, transmitters should be directly mounted to the meter manifold location. 5. Steam meter shall not be installed in a confined space. 6. Access must not be hindered by surrounding mechanical, electrical, plumbing or HVAC ducting or equipment. Provide at least 18 inches of clearance. 7. Steam meter shall not have blowdown provisions installed above sensitive equipment that could be damaged by bursts of steam. 8. A local 1/2 inch or 3/4 inch Thread-o-let with a 0-100 PSI pressure gauge with a siphon and snubber must be installed after the first isolation valve but before the meter body on the incoming steam header to monitor steam pressure into the building. A shutoff valve shall be installed to allow the pressure gauge to be serviced. 9. Upstream 0-160 PSIG pressure transmitter with digital display and serviceable built in snubber, accompanied with a steam rated isolation valve, piston siphon, 2-valve manifold with vent, and transmitter manufacturer specific mounting bracket. 10. Steam meter body to consist of flow conditioning element, meter sensor thermowell with RTD rated for a minimum of 400°F. A shutoff valve shall be installed to allow the pressure gauge to be serviced. 11. If applicable, a downstream transmitter setup may be required and should be discussed with the engineer of record and the owner. 12. For vertical meter orientations, a Parker M3-889S adapter must be installed in line with the differential transmitter. 13. For systems not on the standard campus 65 PSIG steam supply, coordination with the engineer of record and the owner is required in order to properly specify system needs. 14. Steam separator or strainer shall be installed prior to the meter body. E. Remove thermostatic elements from steam traps during temporary and trial usage, and until system has been operated and dirt pockets cleaned of sediment and scale. University of Connecticut STEAM AND CONDENSATE HEATING SPECIALTIES 23 2214 -8 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 F. In high pressure and medium pressure mains, provide 3/4 inch nipple in bottom of main, extending 3/4 inch into and above bottom of pipe. Provide dirt pocket with 1/2 inch high pressure thermostatic trap. G. Provide pressure reducing stations with pressure reducing valve, valved bypass, strainer and pressure gage on upstream side, relief valve and pressure gage on downstream side of pressure reducing valve. 1. Pressure reducing station shall be one or two stages as required, to produce flat reduced pressure curve over range of capacity. 2. Locate pilot operator control minimum 6 feet downstream of valve. H. Rate relief valves for pressure upstream of pressure reducing station, for full operating capacity. Set relief at maximum 20 percent above reduced pressure. I. Terminate relief valves to outdoors 2 feet minimum above roof. Provide drip pan elbow with drain connection to nearest floor drain. J. When several relief valve vents are connected to a common header, header cross section area shall equal sum of individual vent outlet areas. K. Remove thermostatic elements from steam traps during temporary and trial usage, and until system has been operated and dirt pockets cleaned of sediment and scale. L. Do not install steam pressure gauges until after systems are pressure tested. END OF SECTION University of Connecticut HVAC DUCTS AND CASINGS 22 3100 -1 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 SECTION 23 3100 HVAC DUCTS AND CASINGS PART 1 GENERAL 1.1 SECTION INCLUDES: A. Duct Materials. B. Duct Liner C. Duct Lagging D. Non-Insulated Flexible ducts. E. Insulated flexible ducts. F. Single wall spiral round ducts. G. Single wall spiral flat oval ducts. H. Double wall spiral insulated round ducts. I. Double wall spiral insulated flat oval ducts. J. Fabric Duct. K. Transverse duct connection system. 1.2 RELATED SECTIONS A. Drawings and general provisions of the contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this section. 1.3 REFERENCES A. ASTM International: 1. ASTM A36/A36M -Standard Specification for Carbon Structural Steel. 2. ASTM A90/A90M -Standard Test Method for Weight Mass of Coating on Iron and Steel Articles with Zinc or Zinc-Alloy Coatings. 3. ASTM A240/A240M -Standard Specification for Chromium and Chromium-Nickel Stainless Steel Plate, Sheet, and Strip for Pressure Vessels and for General Applications. 4. ASTM A666 -Standard Specification for Annealed or Cold-Worked Austenitic Stainless Steel Sheet, Strip, Plate, and Flat Bar. 5. ASTM A568/A568M -Standard Specification for Steel, Sheet, Carbon, and High-Strength, Low-Alloy, Hot-Rolled and Cold-Rolled, General Requirements for. 6. ASTM A653/A653M -Standard Specification for Steel Sheet, Zinc-Coated (Galvanized) or Zinc-Iron Alloy-Coated (Galvannealed) by the Hot-Dip Process. 7. ASTM A1008/A1008M -Standard Specification for Steel, Sheet, Cold-Rolled, Carbon, Structural, High-Strength Low-Alloy and High-Strength Low-Alloy with Improved Formability. 8. A1011/A1011M-07 Standard Specification for Steel, Sheet and Strip, Hot-Rolled, Carbon, Structural, High-Strength Low-Alloy, High-Strength Low-Alloy with Improved Formability, and Ultra-High Strength 9. ASTM B209 -Standard Specification for Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Sheet and Plate. 10. ASTM C14 -Standard Specification for Concrete Sewer, Storm Drain, and Culvert Pipe. University of Connecticut HVAC DUCTS AND CASINGS 22 3100 -2 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 11. ASTM C443 -Standard Specification for Joints for Concrete Pipe and Manholes, Using Rubber Gaskets. 12. ASTM E84 -Standard Test Method for Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials. B. National Fire Protection Association: 1. NFPA 90A -Standard for the Installation of Air Conditioning and Ventilating Systems. 2. NFPA 90B -Standard for the Installation of Warm Air Heating and Air Conditioning Systems. 3. NFPA 96 -Standard for Ventilation Control and Fire Protection of Commercial Cooking Operations. C. Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors: 1. SMACNA -Fibrous Glass Duct Construction Standards. 2. SMACNA -HVAC Air Duct Leakage Test Manual. 3. SMACNA -HVAC Duct Construction Standard -Metal and Flexible. D. Underwriters Laboratories Inc.: 1. UL 181 -Factory-Made Air Ducts and Connectors. 1.4 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. Delegated Duct Design: Duct construction, including sheet metal thicknesses, seam and joint construction, reinforcements, and hangers and supports, shall comply with SMACNA's "HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible" and performance requirements and design criteria indicated in "Duct Schedule" Article. B. Structural Performance: Duct hangers and supports shall withstand the effects of gravity loads and stresses within limits and under conditions described in SMACNA's "HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible" C. Variation of duct configuration or sizes other than those of equivalent or lower loss coefficient is not permitted except by written permission. Size round ducts installed in place of rectangular ducts in accordance with ASHRAE table of equivalent rectangular and round ducts. 1.5 SUBMITTALS A. Shop Drawings: Submit duct fabrication drawings, drawn to scale not smaller than 1/4 inch equals 1 foot, on drawing sheets same size as Contract Documents, indicating: 1. Fabrication, assembly, and installation details, including plans, elevations, sections, details of components, and attachments to other work. 2. Duct layout, indicating pressure classifications and sizes in plan view. For exhaust duct systems, indicate classification of materials handled as defined in this section. 3. Fittings. 4. Reinforcing details and spacing. 5. Seam and joint construction details. 6. Penetrations through fire rated and other walls. 7. Terminal unit, coil, and humidifier installations. 8. Hangers and supports, including methods for building attachment, vibration isolation, and duct attachment. University of Connecticut HVAC DUCTS AND CASINGS 22 3100 -3 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 B. Product Data: Submit data for duct materials, duct liner, duct connectors. C. Test Reports: Indicate pressure tests performed. Include date, section tested, test pressure, and leakage rate, following SMACNA HVAC Air Duct Leakage Test Manual. 1.6 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Project Record Documents: Record actual locations of ducts and duct fittings. Record changes in fitting location and type. Show additional fittings used. 1.7 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Perform Work in accordance with SMACNA -HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and flexible. B. Construct ductwork to NFPA 90A, NFPA 90B and NFPA 96 standards as applicable. 1.8 QUALIFICATIONS A. Manufacturer: Company specializing in manufacturing products specified in this section with minimum three years documented experience. B. Installer: Company specializing in performing Work of this section with minimum three years documented experience. 1.9 ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS A. Do not install duct sealant when temperatures are less than those recommended by sealant manufacturers. B. Maintain temperatures during and after installation of duct sealant. 1.10 FIELD MEASUREMENTS A. Verify field measurements prior to fabrication. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.1 DUCT MATERIALS A. Galvanized Steel Ducts: ASTM A653/A653M galvanized steel sheet, lock-forming quality, having G90 (zinc coating of in conformance with ASTM A90/A90M. B. Steel Ducts: ASTM A1008/A1008M, with oiled, matte finish for exposed ducts. C. Aluminum Ducts: ASTM B209; aluminum sheet, alloy 3003-H14. Aluminum Connectors and Bar Stock: Alloy 6061-T6 or of equivalent strength. Mill finish for concealed ducts, and standard, one-side bright finish for duct surfaces exposed to view. D. Stainless Steel Ducts: ASTM A480/A480M, Type 316. Exposed surface finish shall be No. 2B, No. 2D, No. 3, or No. 4 as indicated in the "Duct Schedule" Article E. Fasteners: Rivets, bolts, or sheet metal screws. F. Hanger Rod: ASTM A36/A36M; steel , galvanized; threaded both ends, threaded one end, or continuously threaded. 2.2 DUCT LINER A. Fibrous-Glass Duct Liner 1. Manufacturers: a. CertainTeed Corporation; Insulation Group. b. Johns Manville. c. Knauf Insulation. University of Connecticut HVAC DUCTS AND CASINGS 22 3100 -4 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 d. Owens Corning. 2. Comply with ASTM C 1071, NFPA 90A, or NFPA 90B; and with NAIMA AH124, "Fibrous Glass Duct Liner Standard." 3. Antimicrobial Erosion-Resistant Coating: Apply to the surface of the liner that will form the interior surface of the duct to act as a moisture repellent and erosion-resistant coating. Antimicrobial compound shall be tested for efficacy by an NRTL and registered by the EPA for use in HVAC systems. 4. Water-Based Liner Adhesive: Comply with NFPA 90A or NFPA 90B and with ASTM C 916. a. For indoor applications, adhesive shall have a VOC content of 80 g/L or less when calculated according to 40 CFR 59, Subpart D (EPA Method 24). B. Flexible Elastomeric Duct Liner: 1. Manufacturers: a. Aeroflex USA Inc. b. Armacell LLC c. K-Flex 2. Description: Elastomeric foam duct liner, integral EPA registered antimicrobial agent, complying with NFPA 90A or NFPA 90B. 3. Thermal Conductivity: 0.27 Btu x in./h x sq. ft. x deg F at 75 deg F mean temperature. 4. Surface-Burning Characteristics: Maximum flame-spread index of 25 and maximum smoke-developed index of 50 when tested according to UL 723; certified by an NRTL. 5. Liner Adhesive: As recommended by insulation manufacturer and complying with NFPA 90A or NFPA 90B. a. For indoor applications, adhesive shall have a VOC content of 50 g/L or less when calculated according to 40 CFR 59, Subpart D (EPA Method 24). 2.3 DUCT LAGGING A. Manufacturers: 1. Kinetics Model KNM-AL or approved equal B. Product Description: Fire-resistant noise barrier material for wrapping ducts. 1. Barrier shall be constructed of a minimum 0.24” thick mass loaded, limp vinyl sheet bonded to a thin layer of reinforced aluminum foil on one side. 2. Nominal density = 2.0 psf 3. Minimum Sound Transmission loss: Frequency, Hz  63  125  250  500  1000  2000  4000  KNM-200  12  21  22  27  32  37  42  2.4 NON-INSULATED FLEXIBLE DUCTS A. Manufacturers: 1. Thermaflex Technaflex 2. Tuttle + Bailey 3. Flexmaster B. Product Description: UL 181, Class 1, aluminum laminate and polyester film with latex adhesive supported by helical-wound spring steel wire. University of Connecticut HVAC DUCTS AND CASINGS 22 3100 -5 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1. Pressure Rating: 10 inches wg positive and 1.0 inches wg negative. 2. Maximum Velocity: 4000 fpm. 3. Temperature Range: -20 degrees F to 210 degrees F. 2.5 INSULATED FLEXIBLE DUCTS A. Manufacturers: 1. Thermaflex 2. Technaflex 3. Tuttle + Bailey 4. Flexmaster B. Product Description: UL 181, Class 1, aluminum laminate and polyester film with latex adhesive supported by helical wound spring steel wire; fiberglass insulation; polyethylene or aluminized vapor barrier film. 1. Pressure Rating: 10 inches wg positive and 1.0 inches wg negative. 2. Maximum Velocity: 4000 fpm. 3. Temperature Range: -20 degrees F to 210 degrees F. 4. Thermal Resistance: 6square feet-hour-degree F per BTU. 5. Vapor Barrier Permeance: 0.05 perm per ASRM E96, Procedure A 2.6 SEALANTS AND GASKETS A. General Sealant and Gasket Requirements: Surface-burning characteristics for sealants and gaskets shall be a maximum flame-spread index of 25 and a maximum smoke-developed index of 50 when tested according to UL 723; certified by an NRTL. B. Water-Based Joint and Seam Sealant: 1. General: Brush-on, water-resistant, mold and mildew resistant, indoor and outdoor use, compatible with galvanized sheet steel (both PVC coated and bare), stainless steel, or aluminum sheets. 2. Solids Content: Minimum 65 percent. 3. Shore A Hardness: Minimum 20. 4. VOC: Maximum 75 g/L (less water). 5. Maximum Static-Pressure Class: 10-inch wg, positive and negative. C. Flanged Joint Sealant: Comply with ASTM C 920. 1. General: Single-component, acid-curing, silicone, elastomeric. 2. For indoor applications, sealant shall have a VOC content of 250 g/L or less when calculated according to 40 CFR 59, Subpart D (EPA Method 24). D. Flange Gaskets: Butyl rubber, neoprene, or EPDM polymer with polyisobutylene plasticizer. E. Round Duct Joint O-Ring Seals: 1. Seal shall provide maximum leakage class of3 cfm/100 sq. ft. at 1-inch wg and shall be rated for10-inch wg static-pressure class, positive or negative. 2.7 SINGLE WALL SPIRAL ROUND DUCTS A. Manufacturers include, but are not limited to: 1. McGill AirFlow Corporation 2. Semco Incorporated 3. Tangent Air Corp 4. Spiral Mfg. Co., Inc. University of Connecticut HVAC DUCTS AND CASINGS 22 3100 -6 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 B. Product Description: UL 181, Class 1, round spiral lockseam duct constructed of galvanized steel. C. Construct ducts and fittings gauge per the latest edition of SMACNA. 2.8 SINGLE WALL SPIRAL FLAT OVAL DUCTS A. Manufacturers include, but are not limited to: 1. McGill AirFlow Corporation 2. Semco Incorporated 3. Tangent Air Corp 4. Spiral Mfg. Co., Inc. B. Product Description: Machine made from round spiral lockseam duct constructed of galvanized steel; rated for 10 inches wg pressure. C. Joints: Either fully welded or bolted flange with gasket material in accordance with manufacturer’s recommendations. D. Construct duct with the following minimum gauges: Major Axis Dimension  Gauge  7 inches to 24 inches  24  25 inches to 48 inches  22  50 inches to 70 inches  20  72 inches to 82 inches  18  84 inches and larger  16  2.9 CONSTRUCT FITTINGS WITH THE FOLLOWING MINIMUM GAUGES: Major Axis Fitting Dimension  Gauge  7 inches to 36 inches  20  37 inches to 60 inches  18  62 inches and larger  16  2.10 DOUBLE WALL SPIRAL INSULATED ROUND DUCTS A. Manufacturers include, but are not limited to: 1. McGill AirFlow Corporation 2. Semco Incorporated 3. Tangent Air Corp 4. Spiral Mfg. Co., Inc. B. Product Description: Machine made from round spiral lock seam duct with light reinforcing corrugations, galvanized steel outer wall, [1] [2] [3] inch thick glass fiber insulation, perforated galvanized steel inner wall; fittings manufactured with perforated inner wall. C. Construct round duct with the following minimum gages: University of Connecticut HVAC DUCTS AND CASINGS 22 3100 -7 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 Diameter  Gauge  3 inches to 14 inches  26  15 inches to 26 inches  24  28 inches to 36 inches  22  38 inches to 50 inches  20  52 inches to 84 inches  18  D. Construct round fittings with the following minimum gages: Diameter  Gauge  3 inches to 14 inches  24  15 inches to 26 inches  22  28 inches to 36 inches  20  38 inches to 50 inches  20  52 inches to 60 inches  18  62 inches to 84 inches  16  2.11 DOUBLE WALL SPIRAL INSULATED FLAT OVAL DUCTS A. Manufacturers include, but are not limited to: 1. McGill AirFlow Corporation 2. Semco Incorporated 3. Tangent Air Corp 4. Spiral Mfg. Co., Inc. 5. United McGill B. Product Description: Machine made from round spiral lockseam duct with light reinforcing corrugations, galvanized steel outer wall, 2 inch thick glass fiber insulation, perforated galvanized steel inner wall; fittings manufactured with perforated inner wall. C. Construct flat oval duct with the following minimum gauges: Major Axis Dimension  Gauge  7 inches to 24 inches  24  25 inches to 48 inches  22  50 inches to 70 inches  20  72 inches to 82 inches  18  84 inches and larger  16  D. Construct flat oval fittings with the following minimum gauges: Major Axis Fitting Dimension  Gauge  7 inches to 36 inches  20  37 inches to 60 inches  18  62 inches and larger  16  University of Connecticut HVAC DUCTS AND CASINGS 22 3100 -8 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2.12 FABRIC DUCTWORK A. Manufacturers: 1. FabricAir Combi-70 2. DuctSox 3. KE Fibertec 4. No Substitutions Acceptable. B. Product Description: Non-metal ductwork as indicated on drawings and by requirements of this section. C. Colors: The colors of the fabric duct shall be as follows: 1. Colors Gymnasium B – 3001 Blue 2. Gymnasium E – 3001 Blue 3. Multipurpose Room D103 – 3003 Dark Gray 4. Corridor D201 -3002 Orange 5. Cafeteria A104 – 3002 Orange D. Fabric is a woven fire retardant and permeable fabric complying with the following characteristics: 1. Fabric: 100% Flame Retardant Polyester 2. Weight: 8.5 oz./yd. per ASTM D3776 3. Shrinkage: Max. 0,5% per DIN EN 26 630 4. Color: By Architect 5. Temperature Range: -40°F to +284°F 6. Permeability: 2 (+/-5%) per ASTM D737, Frazier – calandering of fabric NOT accepted 7. Fire Retardancy: Must meet the requirements in NFPA 90-A, ICC AC-167 and UL2518 E. SYSTEMS FABRICATION REQUIREMENTS 1. Fabric duct installed 20 feet or more above finished floor shall have the “Oriflow” dispersion option with rows of 1” diameter holes at 4 o’clock and 8 o’clock positions. 2. Fabric Duct installed in the 8 to 12 foot above finished floor range shall have the “microflow” dispersion option. 3. Color of nozzles must match color of fabric. 4. Location and number of nozzles to be specified and approved by manufacturer. 5. The system is made of permeable fabric. Permeability of fabric must be reached based on weave construction only and weave must have gone through thermo fixation in order to secure same permeability after wash. Fabric with permeability obtained based on calandering is not accepted. 6. Provide system in sections optimized for maintenance, connected by zippers. Zippers must provide closure completely around the circumference to prevent leakage. Required number of zippers as specified by manufacturer. 7. Each section to have a unique tag including information about: manufacturers order number, position, diameter of section, length of University of Connecticut HVAC DUCTS AND CASINGS 22 3100 -9 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 section, maintenance instruction, code compliance and contact details for spare parts. 8. Fabric system shall include connectors to attach to suspension system listed below. F. DESIGN PARAMETERS 1. Use fabric air diffusers only for positive pressure air distribution. 2. Do not use fabric air diffusers in concealed locations. 3. Fabric diffusers shall be designed from minimum 0.25” water gage to 3” as the maximum – 0.5” being the standard. 4. Design temperatures between –40°F and 284°F 5. Manufacturer shall approve all technical design parameters. G. HANGERS AND SUPPORT 1. Provide all hangers and support for complete system. All hangers shall be by ductwork manufacturer. Provide all hangers so when ductwork is unpressurized ductwork will not lose shape. 2.13 TRANSVERSE DUCT CONNECTION SYSTEM A. Manufacturers: 1. United McGill 2. Semco 3. ACME 4. Nufab B. Product Description: SMACNA "E" rated, SMACNA "F" rated or SMACNA "J" rated rigidity class connection, interlocking angle and duct edge connection system with sealant, gasket, cleats, and corner clips. 2.14 DUCTWORK FABRICATION A. Fabricate and support rectangular ducts in accordance with SMACNA HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible . Provide duct material, gages, reinforcing, and sealing for operating pressures indicated. B. Fabricate and support round ducts with longitudinal seams in accordance with SMACNA HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible (Round Duct Construction Standards). Provide duct material, gages, reinforcing, and sealing for operating pressures indicated. C. TDC connections on all ductwork where any dimension exceeds 12 inches. Slip and drive connection acceptable on duct sizes less than 12” x 12”. D. Construct T's, bends, and elbows with minimum radius 1-1/2 times centerline duct width. Where not possible and where rectangular elbows are used, provide [airfoil] turning vanes. Where acoustical lining is indicated, furnish turning vanes of perforated metal with glass fiber insulation. E. Increase duct sizes gradually, not exceeding 15 degrees divergence wherever possible; maximum 30 degrees divergence upstream of equipment and 45 degrees convergence downstream. University of Connecticut HVAC DUCTS AND CASINGS 22 3100 -10 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 F. Fabricate continuously welded round and oval duct fittings two gages heavier than duct gages indicated in SMACNA Standard. Minimum 4 inch cemented slip joint, brazed or electric welded. Prime coat welded joints. G. Provide standard 45-degree lateral wye takeoffs. When space does not allow 45-degree lateral wye takeoff, use 90-degree conical tee connections. H. Seal joints between duct sections and duct seams with welds, gaskets, mastic adhesives, mastic plus embedded fabric systems. 1. Sealants, Mastics: Conform to UL 181A. Provide products bearing appropriate UL 181A markings. 2. Do not provide sealing products not bearing UL approval markings. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.1 EXAMINATION A. Division 01 -Administrative Requirements: Coordination and project conditions. B. Verify sizes of equipment connections before fabricating transitions. 3.2 INSTALLATION A. General: 1. Drawing plans, schematics, and diagrams indicate general location and arrangement of duct system. Indicated duct locations, configurations, and arrangements were used to size ducts and calculate friction loss for air-handling equipment sizing and for other design considerations. Install duct systems as indicated unless deviations to layout are approved on Shop Drawings and Coordination Drawings. 2. Install and seal ducts in accordance with SMACNA HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible. 3. During construction, install temporary closures of metal or taped polyethylene on open ductwork to prevent construction dust from entering ductwork system. 4. Use crimp joints with or without bead or beaded sleeve couplings for joining round duct sizes 8inch and smaller. 5. Install duct hangers and supports in accordance with Section 23 05 29. 6. Use double nuts and lock washers on threaded rod supports. 7. Install ducts close to walls, overhead construction, columns, and other structural and permanent enclosure elements of building. 8. Install ducts with a clearance of 1 inch, plus allowance for insulation thickness. 9. Do not route ducts through transformer vaults or electrical equipment rooms and enclosures. 10. Where ducts pass through non-fire-rated interior partitions and exterior walls and are exposed to view, cover the opening between the partition and duct or duct insulation with sheet metal flanges of same metal thickness as the duct. Overlap openings on four sides by at least 1-1/2 inches. 11. Where ducts pass through fire-rated interior partitions and exterior walls, install fire dampers. Comply with requirements in Division 23, Air Duct Accessories for fire and smoke dampers. B. Flexible ductwork 1. Maximum length of four feet in any one location. University of Connecticut HVAC DUCTS AND CASINGS 22 3100 -11 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2. When located above ceilings, support flexible duct from above; flexible duct shall not touch the ceiling. 3. Minimize kinks and sags 4. Flexible duct shall be located only where concealed and accessible. 5. Non-insulated flexible ductwork: Provide when the metal ductwork connected to is not insulated. 6. Insulated flexible ductwork: Provide when the metal ductwork connected to is insulated. R-value of flexible ductwork insulation shall meet or exceed the R-value of the metal ductwork insulation. 7. Elbow supports: Provide above flexible ductwork connections to ceiling diffusers. Use cable ties as indicated in the manufacturer’s installation instructions. 8. Connections to rigid ductwork: Provide both a drawband and two layers of duct tape lapped approximately 25% at each connection of flexible ductwork to rigid ductwork. Drawbands shall be the non-metallic type listed and labeled in accordance with UL 181B. Duct tape shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 181B. C. For outdoor ductwork, protect ductwork, ductwork supports, linings and coverings from weather. 3.3 DUCT SEALING A. Duct Seal Level Description Seal Level  Sealing Requirements*  A  All transverse joints, longitudinal seams, and duct wall penetrations. Pressure sensitive tape shall not be used as the primary sealant, unless it has been certified to comply with UL-181A or UL0181B by an independent testing laboratory and the tape is used in accordance with that certification  B  All transverse joints, longitudinal seams. Pressure sensitive tape shall not be used as the primary sealant, unless it has been certified to comply with UL-181A or UL0181B by an independent testing laboratory and the tape is used in accordance with that certification.  C  Transverse joints only.  Notes: Longitudinal seams are joints oriented in the direction of flow. Transverse joints are connections of two duct sections oriented perpendicular to airflow. Duct wall penetrations are openings made by any screw fastener, pipe, rod, or wire. Spiral lock seams in a round or flat oval duct need not be sealed. All other connections are considered transverse joints, including but not limited to spin-ins, taps, and other branch connections, access door frames and jambs, duct connections to equipment, etc.  B. Minimum Duct Seal Levels Duct Type University of Connecticut HVAC DUCTS AND CASINGS 22 3100 -12 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 Duct Location  Supply  Exhaust  Return 2-in. or less (1)  Greater than 2.in. (1)  Outdoor  A  A  C  A  Unconditioned Space (2)  B  A  C  B  Conditioned Space  C  B  B  C  Notes: Duct design static pressure classification Includes indirectly conditioned spaces such as return air plenums  3.4 INTERFACE WITH OTHER PRODUCTS A. Install openings in ductwork where required to accommodate thermometers and controllers. Install pitot tube openings for testing of systems. Install pitot tube complete with metal can with spring device or screw to prevent air leakage. Where openings are provided in insulated ductwork, install insulation material inside metal ring. B. Connect air terminal units to supply ducts directly or with four foot maximum length of flexible duct. Do not use flexible duct to change direction. 3.5 CLEANING A. Division 01 -Execution and Closeout Requirements: Final cleaning. B. Duct cleaning is required if test sections of metal duct system, chosen randomly by Owner, for cleanliness according to "Vacuum Test" in NADCA ACR, "Assessment, Cleaning and Restoration of HVAC Systems." do not meet the following criteria: 1. Cleanliness Level: Net weight of debris collected on the filter media shall not exceed 0.75 mg/100 sq. cm. C. Clean duct system and force air at high velocity through duct to remove accumulated dust. To obtain sufficient air flow, clean one half of system completely before proceeding to other half. Protect equipment with potential to be harmed by excessive dirt with temporary filters, or bypass during cleaning. D. Clean duct systems with high power vacuum machines. Protect equipment with potential to be harmed by excessive dirt with filters, or bypass during cleaning. Install access openings into ductwork for cleaning purposes. 3.6 DUCTWORK LEAKAGE TESTING A. The following ductwork systems shall be pressure/leakage tested: 1. All ductwork to be concealed in a sheetrock, concrete block or other permanent chase shall be pressure tested before ductwork is concealed. 2. IECC REQUIREMENTS a. Representative sections totaling no less than 25% of ductwork systems listed below that are constructed and installed for 3” w.c. or more (positive or negative). 3. For ductwork leakage testing: “Ductwork main” shall be defined as all ductwork serving more than one grille or diffuser. University of Connecticut HVAC DUCTS AND CASINGS 22 3100 -13 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 4. All ductwork outside of the building insulation envelope shall be pressure tested. B. Testing shall conform to the following: 1. Test static pressure must be the lower of 125% of the external static pressure of the air moving equipment or the construction static pressure class of the ductwork. 2. Test in accordance with SMACNA HVAC Air Duct Leakage Test Manual. Maximum Allowable Leakage shall be in accordance with Duct Pressure Class rating listed below and Leakage Class listed here-in. 3. For Ductwork Pressure Class 3” w.c: Leakage Class shall be 8. 4. For Ductwork Pressure Class 2” w.c or less: Leakage Class shall be 16. 5. Testing shall occur after ductwork has been cleaned, but before duct insulation is applied or ductwork is concealed. C. Duct Leakage Test Report shall include: 1. Date of test. 2. Name of company and person conducting the test. 3. Name of company and person witnessing the test. 4. Description of ductwork tested. Provide drawings to indicate section of ductwork being tested. Labeling on the drawings shall correspond to labeling in the report. 5. Surface area (square feet) of section of ductwork being tested. 6. Duct design operating pressure (inches w.c.) 7. P = Duct design test static pressure (inches w.c.) 8. Duct capacity, air flow 9. CL= Specified Leakage Class. 10. F = Leakage factor (CFM / 100 sf of duct area) 11. Maximum allowable leakage (CFM) 12. Test apparatus a. Blower b. Orifice tube size c. Orifice size d. Calibrated 13. Test orifice differential pressure (inches w.c.) 3.7 SCHEDULES A. Ductwork Material Schedule: University of Connecticut HVAC DUCTS AND CASINGS 22 3100 -14 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 AIR SYSTEM  MATERIAL  Supply (Heating Systems)  Galvanized Steel, Aluminum,  Supply (System with Cooling Coils)  Galvanized Steel, Aluminum,  Return and Relief  Galvanized Steel, Aluminum  General Exhaust  Galvanized Steel, Aluminum  Outside Air Intake  Galvanized Steel  Hydrotherapy 025C, Tanks 032A,  Stainless Steel, Aluminum (fabric duct where  Practice 032 & ERG Rowers/Bikes  shown on drawings)  032B  B. Ductwork Pressure Class Schedule: AIR SYSTEM  PRESSURE CLASS  Supply Ductwork (upstream of VAV boxes terminal units and/or final balancing damper)  3 inch wg  Supply Ductwork (downstream of VAV boxes and terminal units)  1 inch wg regardless of velocity.  Return and Relief  2 inch wg regardless of velocity.  General Exhaust  1 inch wg regardless of velocity.  All Others Not Identified  1.5x maximum anticipated system pressure  C. Ductwork Liner Schedule: AIR SYSTEM  THICKNESS  10 ft downstream of VAV box  1 inch  10 ft upstream / downstream of ducted VRF unit  1 inch  First 10 ft of supply and return/ exhaust from AHU/ERV/DOAS  1 inch  Transfer air ducts  1 inch  END OF SECTION University of Connecticut AIR DUCT ACCESSORIES 23 3300 -1 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 SECTION 23 3300 AIR DUCT ACCESSORIES PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES: A. Back-draft dampers. B. Combination fire-and-smoke dampers. C. Duct access doors. D. Dynamic fire dampers. E. Smoke dampers. F. Volume control dampers. G. Flexible duct connections. H. Duct test holes. I. Duct Silencers. J. Remote Damper Operators. K. Turning Vanes. 1.02 RELATED SECTIONS: A. Drawings and general provisions of the contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this section. B. Section 23 04 00 – General Conditions for Mechanical Trades C. Section 23 09 23 -Direct-Digital Control System for HVAC: Execution and Product requirements for connection and control of Combination Smoke and Fire Dampers for placement by this section. D. Section 23 31 00 -HVAC Ducts: Requirements for duct construction and pressure classifications. E. Section 26 05 03 -Equipment Wiring Connections: Execution requirements for connection of electrical Combination Smoke and Fire Dampers specified by this section. 1.03 EFERENCES (FOLLOW THE MOST CURRENTLY ADOPTED AMENDED VERSION) A. Air Movement and Control Association International, Inc.: 1. AMCA 500 -Test Methods for Louvers, Dampers, and Shutters. B. ASTM International: 1. ASTM E1 -Standard Specification for ASTM Thermometers. C. National Fire Protection Association: 1. NFPA 90A -Standard for the Installation of Air Conditioning and Ventilating Systems. 2. NFPA 92A -Recommended Practice for Smoke-Control Systems. D. Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors: 1. SMACNA -HVAC Duct Construction Standard -Metal and Flexible. E. Underwriters Laboratories Inc.: 1. UL 555 -Standard for Safety for Fire Dampers. University of Connecticut AIR DUCT ACCESSORIES 23 3300 -2 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2. UL 555C -Standard for Safety for Ceiling Dampers. 3. UL 555S -Standard for Safety for Smoke Dampers. University of Connecticut AIR DUCT ACCESSORIES 23 3300 -3 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 SUBMITTALS F. Shop Drawings: Indicate for shop fabricated assemblies including volume control dampers, duct access doors and duct test holes. G. Product Data: Submit data for shop fabricated assemblies and hardware used. H. Product Data: Submit for the following. Include where applicable electrical characteristics and connection requirements. 1. Fire dampers including locations and ratings. 2. Smoke dampers including locations and ratings. 3. Backdraft dampers. 4. Flexible duct connections. 5. Volume control dampers. 6. Duct access doors. 7. Duct test holes. I. Product Data: For fire dampers, smoke dampers, combination fire and smoke dampers submit the following: 1. Include UL ratings, dynamic ratings, leakage, pressure drop and maximum pressure data. 2. Indicate materials, construction, dimensions, and installation details. 3. Damper pressure drop ratings based on tests and procedures performed in accordance with AMCA 500. J. Manufacturer's Installation Instructions: Submit for Fire and Combination Smoke and Fire Dampers. K. Manufacturer's Certificate: Certify products meet or exceed specified requirements. 1.04 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Project Record Documents: Record actual locations of access doors test holes and dampers. B. Operation and Maintenance Data: Submit for Combination Smoke and Fire Dampers. 1.05 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Dampers tested, rated and labeled in accordance with the latest UL requirements. B. Damper pressure drop ratings based on tests and procedures performed in accordance with AMCA 500. C. Maintain one copy of each document on site. 1.06 QUALIFICATIONS A. Manufacturer: Company specializing in manufacturing products specified in this section with minimum three years documented experience. 1.07 PRE-INSTALLATION MEETINGS A. Convene minimum one week prior to commencing work of this section. 1.08 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Protect dampers from damage to operating linkages and blades. B. Delivery: Deliver materials to site in manufacturer's original, unopened containers and packaging, with labels clearly indicating manufacturer and material. University of Connecticut AIR DUCT ACCESSORIES 23 3300 -4 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 C. Storage: Store materials in a dry area indoor, protected from damage. D. Handling: Handle and lift dampers in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. Protect materials and finishes during handling and installation to prevent damage. 1.09 FIELD MEASUREMENTS A. Verify field measurements prior to fabrication. 1.10 COORDINATION A. Coordinate Work where appropriate with building control Work. 1.11 WARRANTY A. Furnish five-year manufacturer warranty for duct accessories. 1.12 EXTRA MATERIALS A. Fusible Links: Furnish quantity equal to 10 percent of number installed. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 BACK-DRAFT DAMPERS A. Manufacturers: 1. Ruskin CB series 2. Price BDD Series 3. Greenheck EM Series B. Product Description: Multi-Blade, back-draft dampers: Parallel-action, gravity-balanced, extruded aluminum. Blades, maximum 6 inch width, center pivoted, with flexible vinyl sealed edges. Blades linked together in rattle-free manner with 90-degree stop, steel ball bearings, and plated steel pivot pin. Furnish dampers with adjustment device to permit setting for varying differential static pressure. 2.02 COMBINATION FIRE AND SMOKE DAMPERS A. Manufacturers: 1. Ruskin 2. Price 3. Greenheck 4. Pottorff 5. Nailor B. Type: Dynamic, fabricate in accordance with NFPA 90A, UL 555, and UL 555S. C. Fire Resistance: 1-1/2 hours through penetrations with fire resistance ratings of less than 3 hours and 3 hours through penetrations with fire resistance ratings of 3 hours or more. D. Leakage Rating: Class II, maximum of 20 cfm at 4 inches wg differential pressure. E. Damper Temperature Rating: 250 degrees F for all except smoke control systems. Smoke control systems must be 350 degrees F rated. F. UL 555S Differential Pressure Rating: 6 in. wg. G. UL 555S Velocity Rating: 2000 fpm H. Frame: minimum16 gage, galvanized steel. I. Blades: 1. Style: Airfoil-shaped, single piece, double skin. University of Connecticut AIR DUCT ACCESSORIES 23 3300 -5 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2. Action: Opposed or parallel. 3. Orientation: Horizontal. 4. Material: Minimum 16 gage equivalent thickness, galvanized steel. 5. Width: Maximum 6 inches. J. Bearings: Stainless steel or Bronze Oilite pressed into frame. K. Seals: Silicone blade edge seals and flexible stainless steel jamb seals. L. Linkage: Concealed in frame. M. Release Device: Electric resettable link to allow damper to be automatically reset with an open & closed indicator. N. Actuator: shall be qualified in accordance with UL 555S to the temperature rating of the damper. Provide with damper O. Operators: UL listed and labeled spring return electric type suitable for 120 volt, single phase, 60 Hz. Provide end switches to indicate damper position. Locate damper operator on exterior of duct and link to damper operating shaft. P. Fusible Link Release Temperature: 165 degrees F. Q. Finish: Mill galvanized. R. Factory installed sleeve provided with mounting angles. Furnish silicone caulk factory applied to sleeve at damper frame to comply with leakage rating requirements. Provide out-of-partition type dampers with fire rated sleeve where conditions do not allow installation of damper within partition. S. Smoke Detector: Duct mounted smoke detectors shall be furnished by Div. 28, installed by Div. 23. Power wiring by Div. 26, control wiring by Div. 28. 2.03 DUCT ACCESS DOORS A. Manufacturers: 1. Ruskin 2. Elgen 3. Greenheck 4. Buckley 5. Kees 6. Pottorff B. Fabricate in accordance with SMACNA HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible Figures 7-2, "Duct Access Doors and Panels," and 7-3, "Access Doors -Round Duct." C. Fabrication: Rigid and close fitting of galvanized steel with sealing gaskets and quick fastening locking devices. For insulated ductwork, furnish minimum 1 inch thick insulation with sheet metal cover. 1. Less than 12 inches square, secure with sash locks. 2. Up to 18 inches Square: Furnish two hinges and two sash locks. 3. Up to 24 x 48 inches: Three hinges and two compression latches. 4. Larger Sizes: Furnish additional hinge. 5. Access panels with sheet metal screw fasteners are not acceptable. D. Materials University of Connecticut AIR DUCT ACCESSORIES 23 3300 -6 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1. Aluminum construction: Minimum 0.032” thick aluminum double wall door, minimum 0.032” thick aluminum frame. Provide for aluminum duct. 2. Steel construction: Minimum 24 gauge galvanized double wall door, minimum 24 gauge galvanized frame. Provide for galvanized steel duct. 3. Stainless steel construction: Minimum 24 gauge stainless steel double wall door, minimum 22 gauge stainless steel frame. Provide for stainless steel or aluminum duct. E. Low Pressure Rectangular (Non-Grease-Ducts): 1. Door: For insulated ducts, provide double wall door with 1” or 2” insulation cavity – as necessary to accommodate required insulation. For non-insulated ducts, provide single wall door. 2. Gasket: Closed cell neoprene. 3. Hardware: Double (opposite side) cam latches or single cam latch with full length (piano style) hinge. 4. Insulation: Glass fiber type, 1” thick for ductwork with up to 1” thick acoustical lining or insulation wrap, 2” thick for ductwork with 1-1/2” and over acoustical lining or insulation wrap. F. Low Pressure Round & Oval Duct (Non-Grease Ducts), 1. Insulated duct, low pressure (3” wg): Welded construction, 18 gauge galvanized steel, 24 gauge galvanized double wall door, double cam latches or single cam latch with full length (piano style) hinge, 2” thick glass fiber insulation. 2. Non-Insulated duct, low pressure (6” wg): 16 gauge galvanized door, plated steel full length (piano style) hinge, zinc plated draw latch(es) and keeper(s), closed cell neoprene gasket. G. High pressure (10” wg): 18 gauge galvanized steel, 24 gauge galvanized double wall door, double cam latches or single cam latch with full length (piano style) hinge, 2” thick glass fiber insulation. 1. Hardware: a. Cam latch type: Cam latches on (4) sides -(1) cam latch per side for 6”x6”, (2) cam latches per side for 8”x8” and over. b. Hinge type: Cam latches on (3) sides, (1) cam latch per side for up to 16”x16”, (2) cam latches per side for 18”x18” and over. 2. Application: For ductwork rated over 3” pressure class positive or negative, provide high pressure access doors. H. Grease Ducts: 16 gauge galvanized door, 16 gauge cold rolled steel (CRS) frame, 2,300°F ceramic fire gasket, UL 1978 Listed. Provide access doors where indicated on the drawings and where cleanouts are required by IMC Section 506.3. 2.04 DYNAMIC FIRE DAMPERS A. Manufacturers: 1. Ruskin 2. Price 3. Greenheck 4. Nailor 5. Pottorff University of Connecticut AIR DUCT ACCESSORIES 23 3300 -7 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 B. Fabricate in accordance with NFPA 90A and UL 555. C. Fire Resistance: 1-1/2 hours through penetrations with fire resistance ratings of less than 3 hours and 3 hours through penetrations with fire resistance ratings of 3 hours or more. D. Dynamic Closure Rating: Dampers classified for dynamic closure to 2000 fpm and 4 inches wg static pressure. E. Construction: 1. Integral Sleeve Frame-Galvanized steel in gauges required by manufacturer’s UL listing. Length: Minimum 20 gage formed Sleeve length shall extend approximately 3” on either side of the wall or floor to facilitate joining the collar to the duct. 2. Blades: a. Style: Curtain type, blades outside of airstream. b. Action: Spring or gravity closure upon fusible link release. c. Material: Minimum 24 gage roll formed, galvanized steel. 3. Closure Springs: Type 301 stainless steel, constant force type, if required. F. Fusible Link Release Temperature: 165 degrees F. G. Mounting: Vertical or horizontal as indicated on Drawings. H. Finish: Mill galvanized. 2.05 SMOKE DAMPERS A. Manufacturers: 1. Ruskin 2. Air Balance 3. Greenheck 4. Nailor 5. Pottorff B. Fabricate in accordance with NFPA 90A and UL 555S. C. Fire Resistance: 1-1/2 hours through penetrations with fire resistance ratings of less than 3 hours and 3 hours through penetrations with fire resistance ratings of 3 hours or more. D. Leakage Rating: Class I, maximum of 8 cfm at 4 inches wg differential pressure.. E. Damper Temperature Rating: 250 degrees F. F. Frame: 16 gage, galvanized steel. G. Blades: 1. Style: Airfoil-shaped, single piece, double skin. 2. Action: Opposed. 3. Orientation: Horizontal. 4. Material: Minimum 13 gage equivalent thickness, galvanized steel. 5. Width: Maximum 6 inches. H. Bearings: Stainless steel pressed into frame. I. Seals: Silicone blade edge seals and flexible stainless steel jamb seals. J. Linkage: Concealed in frame. University of Connecticut AIR DUCT ACCESSORIES 23 3300 -8 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 K. Operators: UL listed and labeled spring return electric type suitable for 120 volt, single phase, 60 Hz. Provide end switches to indicate damper position. Locate damper operator on exterior of duct and link to damper operating shaft. L. Sleeve: Factory installed 16 gage sleeve, minimum 12 inches long. M. Finish: Mill galvanized. N. Smoke Detector: Duct mounted smoke detectors are furnished by Div. 28, installed by Div. 23. Power wiring by Div. 26, control wiring by Div. 28 2.06 VOLUME CONTROL DAMPERS A. Manufacturers: 1. Ruskin 2. Nailor 3. Greenheck 4. Flexmaster 5. McGill Airflow 6. Nailor 7. Pottorff B. Fabricate in accordance with SMACNA HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible. C. Splitter Dampers: 1. Material: Same gage as duct to 24 inches size in both dimensions, and two gages heavier for sizes over 24 inches. 2. Blade: Fabricate of single thickness sheet metal to streamline shape, secured with continuous hinge or rod. 3. Operator: Minimum 3/8 inch diameter rod in self aligning, universal joint action, flanged bushing with set screw. 4. Single Blade Dampers: Fabricate for duct sizes up to 12 x 48 inch. D. Multi-Blade Damper: Fabricate of opposed blade pattern with maximum blade sizes 8 x 72 inch. Assemble center and edge crimped blades in prime coated or galvanized frame channel with suitable hardware. E. End Bearings: Except in round ductwork 12inches and smaller, furnish end bearings. On multiple blade dampers, furnish oil-impregnated nylon or sintered bronze bearings. Furnish closed end bearings on ducts having pressure classification over 2 inches wg.. F. Quadrants: 1. Furnish locking, indicating quadrant regulators on single and multi-blade dampers. 2. On insulated ducts mount quadrant regulators on standoff mounting brackets, bases, or adapters. 3. Where rod lengths exceed 30 inches furnish regulator at both ends. 2.07 FLEXIBLE DUCT CONNECTIONS A. Manufacturers: 1. Ventfabrics Inc. Ventglas 2. United McGill 3. Elgen University of Connecticut AIR DUCT ACCESSORIES 23 3300 -9 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 4. DuroDyne 5. Ventfabrics 6. Ductmate Industries B. Fabricate in accordance with SMACNA HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible. C. Materials: Flame-retardant or noncombustible fabrics. D. Coatings and Adhesives: Comply with UL 181, Class 1. E. Metal-Edged Connectors: Factory fabricated with a fabric strip minimum 3-1/2 inches wide attached to two strips of galvanized or aluminum sheet steel. Provide metal compatible with connected ducts. F. Indoor System, Flexible Connector Fabric: Glass fabric double coated with neoprene. 1. Minimum Weight: 26 oz./sq. yd. 2. Tensile Strength: 480 lbf/inchin the warp and 360 lbf/inchin the filling. 3. Service Temperature: Minus 40 to plus 200 deg F. G. Outdoor System, Flexible Connector Fabric: Glass fabric double coated with weatherproof, synthetic rubber resistant to UV rays and ozone. 1. Minimum Weight: 24 oz./sq. yd. 2. Tensile Strength: 530 lbf/inchin the warp and 440 lbf/inchin the filling. 3. Service Temperature: Minus 50 to plus 250 deg F H. High-Temperature System, Flexible Connectors: Glass fabric coated with silicone rubber. 1. Minimum Weight: 16 oz./sq. yd. 2. Tensile Strength: 285 lbf/inchin the warp and 185 lbf/inchin the filling. 3. Service Temperature: Minus 67 to plus 500 deg F I. High-Corrosive-Environment System, Flexible Connectors:Glass fabric with chemical-resistant coating. 1. Minimum Weight: 14 oz./sq. yd. 2. Tensile Strength: 450 lbf/inchin the warp and 340 lbf/inchin the filling. 3. Service Temperature: Minus 67 to plus 500 deg F J. Leaded Vinyl Sheet: Minimum 0.55 inch thick, 0.87 lbs. per sq ft, 10 dB attenuation in 10 to 10,000 Hz range. 2.08 DUCT TEST HOLES A. Manufacturers: 1. Dwyer 2. Flow Kinetics 3. Air Balance 4. Substitutions: Division 01 -General Requirements. B. Permanent Test Holes: Factory fabricated, air tight flanged fittings with screw cap. Furnish extended neck fittings to clear insulation. 2.09 DUCT SILENCERS A. Manufacturers: 1. IAC 2. Kinetics Noise Control University of Connecticut AIR DUCT ACCESSORIES 23 3300 -10 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 3. McGill AirSilence 4. Ruskin 5. Vibro-Acoustics. B. Silencers shall be constructed in accordance with ASHRAE and SMACNA standards. Silencers shall not fail structurally when subjected to a differential air pressure of 8 inches water gauge. C. Outer casing: ASTM A 653/A 653M minimum 22 gauge G90 galvanized sheet steel. D. Casing seams and joints: Lock-formed and sealed or stitch welded and sealed. E. Inner perforated metal liner: ASTM A 653/A 653M minimum 26 gauge G90 galvanized sheet steel. F. Media: Acoustic quality, shot-free glass fiber insulation with long, resilient fibers bonded with a thermosetting resin. Glass fiber density and compression shall be as required to insure conformance with laboratory test data. Glass fiber shall be packed with a minimum of 15% compression during silencer assembly. Media shall be Type, Dimensions, and Performance: As indicated on the duct silencer schedule. G. Rectangular elbow silencers: Acoustical splitters shall be internally radiused and aerodynamically designed for efficient turning of the air. Half and full splitters shall be provided as necessary to achieve the scheduled insertion loss. Silencers with a turning cross-section dimension greater than 48” shall have at minimum two half splitters and one full splitter. H. Transitional silencers: Transitioning shall occur internal to the silencer such that the height of the gap or air passage is uniformly changing with the length of the splitters. 2.10 REMOTE DAMPER OPERATORS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following : 1. Pottorff. 2. Ventfabrics, Inc. 3. Young Regulator Company. B. Description: Cable system designed for remote manual damper adjustment. C. Tubing: Brass, Copper or Aluminum. D. Cable: Stainless steel. E. Wall-Box Mounting: Recessed. F. Wall-Box Cover-Plate Material: Painted steel. 2.11 TURNING VANES A. Manufacturers: 1. Ductmate Industries, Inc. 2. Duro Dyne Inc. 3. Elgen Manufacturing. 4. METALAIRE, Inc. 5. SEMCO Incorporated. 6. Ward Industries, Inc.; a division of Hart & Cooley, Inc. University of Connecticut AIR DUCT ACCESSORIES 23 3300 -11 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 B. Manufactured Turning Vanes for Metal Ducts: Curved blades of galvanized sheet steel; support with bars perpendicular to blades set; set into vane runners suitable for duct mounting. C. General Requirements: Comply with SMACNA's "HVAC Duct Construction Standards .Metal and Flexible"; Figures 4-3, "Vanes and Vane Runners," and 4-4, "Vane Support in Elbows." D. Vane Construction: Single wall for ducts up to 48 inches wide and double wall for larger dimensions. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 EXAMINATION A. Verify rated walls are ready for fire damper installation. B. Verify ducts and equipment installation are ready for accessories. C. Check location of air outlets and inlets and make necessary adjustments in position to conform to architectural features, symmetry, and lighting arrangement. 3.02 INSTALLATION. A. Install in accordance with NFPA 90A, and follow SMACNA HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible. Refer to Section 23 31 00 for duct construction and pressure class. B. Install motorized back-draft dampers on exhaust fans or exhaust ducts nearest to outside and where indicated on Drawings. C. Access Doors: Install access doors of type suitable for application at the following locations: 1. Spaced every 50 feet of straight duct. 2. Upstream of each elbow. 3. Upstream of each reheat coil. 4. Before and after each duct mounted filter. 5. Before and after each duct mounted coil. 6. Before and after each duct mounted fan. 7. Before and after each automatic control damper. 8. Before and after each fire damper, smoke damper, combination fire and smoke damper. 9. Downstream of each VAV box. 10. Install at locations for cleaning kitchen exhaust ductwork in accordance with NFPA 96. D. Access Door Sizes: Install minimum 8 x 8 inch size for hand access, 18 x 18 inch size for shoulder access. Install 4 x 4 inch for balancing dampers only. Review locations prior to fabrication. 1. Mark access doors for fire and smoke dampers on outside surface, with minimum 1/2 inch high letters reading: FIRE/SMOKE DAMPER, SMOKE DAMPER, OR FIRE DAMPER. University of Connecticut AIR DUCT ACCESSORIES 23 3300 -12 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 E. Install temporary duct test holes and required for testing and balancing purposes. Cut or drill in ducts. Cap with neat patches, neoprene plugs, threaded plugs, or threaded or twist-on metal caps. F. Install fire dampers, combination fire and smoke dampers and smoke dampers at locations as indicated on Drawings and as indicated in specifications. Install with required perimeter mounting angles, sleeves, breakaway duct connections, corrosion resistant springs, bearings, bushings and hinges. Install dampers and accessories with required clearance for access. Provide all power and control wiring for a complete and operable system. 1. Install smoke dampers and combination smoke and fire dampers in accordance with NFPA 92A. 2. Install dampers square and free from racking with blades running horizontally. 3. Do not compress or stretch damper frame into duct or opening. 4. Handle damper using sleeve or frame. Do not lift damper using blades, actuator, or jack shaft. 5. Install bracing for multiple section assemblies to support assembly weight and to hold against system pressure. Install bracing as needed. 3.03 DEMONSTRATION A. Demonstrate re-setting of fire dampers to Owner's representative. END OF SECTION University of Connecticut HVAC FAN 23 3400 - 1 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 SECTION 23 3400 HVAC FANS PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Inline centrifugal fans B. Downblast roof exhausters C. HVLS Fans D. Dryer Booster Fans E. Motors and drives. F. Fan accessories. 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this section. B. Section 23 0548 - Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC Piping and Equipment. C. Section 23 0700 - HVAC Insulation. D. Section 23 3300 - Air Duct Accessories:  Dampers. E. Section 26 0503 - Equipment Wiring Connections. F. REFERENCE STANDARDS (follow the most currently adopted amended version)ABMA STD 9 - Load Ratings and Fatigue Life for Ball Bearings. G. ABMA STD 11 - Load Ratings and Fatigue Life for Roller Bearings. H. AMCA (DIR) - (Directory of) Products Licensed Under AMCA International Certified Ratings Program. I. AMCA 99 - Standards Handbook. J. AMCA 210 - Laboratory Methods of Testing Fans for Certified Aerodynamic Performance Rating. K. AMCA 300 - Reverberant Room Method for Sound Testing of Fans. L. AMCA 301 - Methods for Calculating Fan Sound Ratings from Laboratory Test Data;. M. NEMA MG 1 - Motors and Generators. N. SMACNA (DCS) - HVAC Duct Construction Standards Metal and Flexible. O. UL-705 – Standard for Safety for Power Ventilators 1.03 SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: Provide data on centrifugal fans and accessories including fan curves with specified operating point clearly plotted, power, RPM, sound power levels for both fan inlet and outlet at rated capacity, and electrical characteristics and connection requirements. B. Shop Drawings:  Indicate assembly of centrifugal fans and accessories including fan curves with specified operating point clearly plotted, sound power levels for both fan inlet and outlet at rated capacity, and electrical characteristics and connection requirements. University of Connecticut HVAC FAN 23 3400 - 2 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 C. Manufacturer's Instructions:  Include complete installation instructions. D. Maintenance Data:  Include instructions for lubrication, motor and drive replacement, spare parts list, and wiring diagrams. E. Maintenance Materials:  Furnish for Owner's use in maintenance of project. F. Extra Materials: 1. Fan Belts:  One set for each individual fan. 1.04 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Manufacturer Qualifications:  Company specializing in manufacturing the type of products specified in this section, with minimum three years of documented experience. B. Products Requiring Electrical Connection:  Listed and classified by Underwriters Laboratories Inc. as suitable for the purpose specified and indicated. 1.05 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Protect motors, shafts, and bearings from weather and construction dust. 1.06 FIELD CONDITIONS A. Permanent fans may not be used for ventilation during construction. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 MANUFACTURERS A. The following list of manufacturers applies to all fans unless otherwise noted in sections below. 1. Greenheck Fan Corporation 2. Loren Cook Company 3. PennBarry 4. Twin City Fan & Blower 2.02 STARTERS, DRIVES & DISCONNECTS A. Provide starters and disconnect switches for fans not scheduled to be controlled by a variable speed controller.. B. Provide belt or direct drive fans as indicated on project schedules. Where belt drives are indicated provide the following: 1. Belts, pulleys, and keys oversized for a minimum of 150 percent of driven horsepower. 2. Belts:  Static free and oil resistant. 3. Fully machined cast iron type, keyed and securely attached to the wheel and motor shafts. 4. Motor pulley adjustable for final system balancing. 5. Readily accessible for maintenance. 6. Sheaves:  For V-belt drives, provide cast iron or steel, dynamically balanced, bored to fit shafts and keyed; variable and adjustable pitch motor sheaves selected so required rpm is obtained with sheaves set at mid-position; fan shaft with self-aligning pre-lubricated ball bearings. C. Disconnect Switches: 1. Factory mounted and wired. University of Connecticut HVAC FAN 23 3400 - 3 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2. Environment Type per NEMA 250:  Unless otherwise indicated, as specified for the following installation locations: a. Indoor Clean, Dry Locations:  Type 1. b. Outdoor Locations:  Type 3R. 3. Finish for Painted Steel Enclosures:  Provide manufacturer's standard, factory applied gray, unless otherwise indicated. 4. Positive electrical shutoff. 5. Wired from fan motor to junction box installed within motor compartment. 2.03 INLINE CENTRIFUGAL FANS A. Manufacturers, Starters, Drives, Disconnects, and Roof Curbs 1. Refer to Section 2.1. B. Centrifugal Fan Unit:  V-belt or direct driven with galvanized steel housing lined with acoustic insulation, resilient mounted motor, gravity backdraft damper in discharge. 2.04 DOWNBLAST ROOF EXHAUSTERS A. Manufacturers, Starters, Drives, Disconnects, and Roof Curbs 1. Refer to Section 2.1. a) Housing: (1) Construct of heavy gage aluminum including curb cap, windband, and motor compartment. (2) Rigid internal support structure. (3) One-piece fabricated or fully welded curb-cap base to windband for leak proof construction. (4) Construct drive frame assembly of heavy gage steel, mounted on vibration isolators. (5) Provide breather tube for fresh air motor cooling and wiring. B. Shafts and Bearings: 1. Fan Shaft: a. Ground and polished steel with anti-corrosive coating. b. First critical speed at least 25 percent over maximum cataloged operating speed. 2. Bearings: a. Permanently sealed or pillow block type. b. Minimum L10 life in excess of 100,000 hours (equivalent to L50 average life of 500,000 hours), at maximum cataloged operating speed. c. 100 percent factory tested. C. Accessories: 1. Automatic Belt Tensioner:  Automatic device that adjusts for correct belt tension. 1. Birdscreen:  Provide galvanized steel construction. University of Connecticut HVAC FAN 23 3400 - 4 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2. Dampers: Provide motorized type. 3. Finishes: Factory primed. 4. Hinge Kit: a. Aluminum hinges. b. Hinges and restraint cables mounted to base. 5. 6. Tie-down Points:  Four brackets located on windband secures fan in heavy wind applications. 7. External motor speed controllers for field mounting. 2.05 HVLS (HIGH VOLUME LOW SPEED) FANS A. Manufacturers: 1. Hunter Industrial 2. MacroAir Fans 3. Big Ass Fans 4. Substitutions: Section 01 60 00 - Product Requirements. B. Fans shall be supported from structure, direct drive permanent split capacitor type; with rolled edge design fan blade set. C. Provide with accessories as shown on plans. D. Provide with (1) wall mounted controller to control (4 to 6) fans, see plans for quantity. Furnish and install control panel with BACnet card and fire alarm relay. E. Color selected by architect. 2.06 DRYER BOOSTER INLINE FANS A. Manufacturers: 1. Fantech 2. Enervex 3. US Draft B. Fan: Inline fan with galvanized steel housing and baked powder-coat finish. Backward inclined blades of the motorized impeller allow lint to pass through the fan. Fan shall be UL 705. C. Pressure Switch: pressure switch automatically activates the booster fan when dryer comes on. Includes 18” of pressure sensing tubing with mounting grommet. D. Indicator Panel: Wall-mount, low voltage indicator panel features an LED light that indicates to the owner that the fan is working properly. The indicator panel will alert of problems such as no power, blocked duct, locked motor rotor and low speed conditions. A 50 foot cable is included to connect the indicator panel to the booster fan. Panel shall have Bacnet compatibility for monitoring and alarms. University of Connecticut HVAC FAN 23 3400 - 5 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 INSTALLATION A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Install fans with resilient mountings and flexible electrical leads. Refer to Section 23 0548. C. Install flexible connections between fan inlet and discharge ductwork; refer to Section 23 0548. Ensure metal bands of connectors are parallel with minimum one inch flex between ductwork and fan while running. D. Install fan restraining snubbers; refer to Section 23 0548.  Adjust snubbers to prevent tension in flexible connectors when fan is operating. E. Provide safety screen where inlet or outlet is exposed. F. Provide motorized dampers on discharge of exhaust fans and as indicated; refer to Section 23 3100. END OF SECTION University of Connecticut AIR TERMINAL UNITS 23 3600 - 1 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 SECTION 233600 AIR TERMINAL UNITS PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Single-duct terminal units. 1. Single-duct, variable-volume units. 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this section. B. Section 22 0513 - Common Motor Requirements for Plumbing Equipment. C. Section 22 0548 - Vibration and Seismic Controls for Plumbing Piping and Equipment. D. Section 23 0513 - Common Motor Requirements for HVAC Equipment. E. Section 23 0548 - Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC Piping and Equipment. F. Section 23 0913 - Instrumentation and Control Devices for HVAC:  Thermostats and actuators. G. Section 23 0923 - Direct-Digital Control System for HVAC. H. Section 23 0993 - Sequence of Operations for HVAC Controls. I. Section 23 2113 - Hydronic Piping:  Connections to heating coils. J. Section 23 2114 - Hydronic Specialties:  Connections to heating coils. K. Section 23 3100 - HVAC Ducts and Casings. L. Section 23 3300 - Air Duct Accessories. M. Section 23 3700 - Air Outlets and Inlets. N. Section 23 8200 - Convection Heating and Cooling Units: Air coils. O. Section 26 2717 - Equipment Wiring:  Electrical characteristics and wiring connections. 1.03 REFERENCE STANDARDS (FOLLOW THE MOST CURRENTLY ADOPTED AMENDED VERSION) A. AHRI 410 - Forced-Circulation Air-Cooling and Air-Heating Coils B. AHRI 880 (I-P) - Performance Rating of Air Terminals. C. AHRI 885 - Procedure for Estimating Occupied Space Sound Levels in the Application of Air Terminals and Air Outlets. D. ASHRAE Std 52.2 - Method of Testing General Ventilation Air-Cleaning Devices for Removal Efficiency by Particle Size. E. ASHRAE Std 62.1 - Ventilation for Acceptable Indoor Air Quality. F. ASHRAE Std 130 - Methods of Testing Air Terminal Units. G. ASTM A492 - Standard Specification for Stainless Steel Rope Wire. H. ASTM A603 - Standard Specification for Zinc-Coated Steel Structural Wire Rope. I. ASTM C1071 - Standard Specification for Fibrous Glass Duct Lining Insulation (Thermal and Sound Absorbing Material). University of Connecticut AIR TERMINAL UNITS 23 3600 - 2 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 J. ASTM E84 - Standard Test Method for Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials. K. ASTM E488 - Standard Test Methods for Strength of Anchors in Concrete Elements. L. NEMA 250 - Enclosures for Electrical Equipment (1000 Volts Maximum). M. NFPA 70 - National Electrical Code; Most Recent Edition Adopted by Authority Having Jurisdiction. N. NFPA 90A - Standard for the Installation of Air-Conditioning and Ventilating Systems. O. SMACNA (SRM) - Seismic Restraint Manual Guidelines for Mechanical Systems; Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors' National Association. P. UL 181 - Standard for Factory-Made Air Ducts and Air Connectors. Q. UL 94 - Tests for Flammability of Plastic Materials for Parts in Devices and Appliances. 1.04 ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS A. Preinstallation Meeting:  Conduct a preinstallation meeting one week prior to the start of the work of this section; require attendance by all affected installers. B. Sequencing:  Ensure that utility connections are achieved in an orderly and expeditious manner. 1.05 SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: Provide data indicating configuration, general assembly, and materials used in fabrication.  Include catalog performance ratings that indicate air flow, static pressure, and NC designation.  Include electrical characteristics and connection requirements. B. Shop Drawings:  Indicate configuration, general assembly, and materials used in fabrication, and electrical characteristics and connection requirements. 1. Include schedules listing discharge and radiated sound power level for each of second through sixth octave bands at inlet static pressures of 1 to 4 inch wg . C. Certificates: Certify that coils are tested and rated in accordance with AHRI 410. D. Manufacturer's Installation Instructions:  Indicate support and hanging details, installation instructions, recommendations, and service clearances required. E. Project Record Documents: Record actual locations of units and locations of access doors required for access of valving. F. Operation and Maintenance Data:  Include manufacturer's descriptive literature, operating instructions, maintenance and repair data, and parts lists.  Include directions for resetting constant-volume regulators. G. Warranty: Submit manufacturer warranty and ensure forms have been completed in Owner's name and registered with manufacturer. H. Maintenance Materials:  Furnish for Owner's use in maintenance of project. I. Extra Materials: 1. Motors:  One of each type and size. 1.06 QUALITY ASSURANCE University of Connecticut AIR TERMINAL UNITS 23 3600 - 3 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 A. Manufacturer Qualifications:  Company specializing in manufacturing the type of products specified in this section, with minimum three years of documented experience. B. Product Listing Organization Qualifications:  An organization recognized by OSHA as a Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory (NRTL) and acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction. 1.07 WARRANTY A. Provide five year manufacturer warranty for air terminal units. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 MANUFACTURERS A. The following list of manufacturers applies to all air terminal units unless otherwise noted in sections below. 1. Price Industries 2. Titus 3. Nailor Industries 4. Trane 5. Johnson Controls Inc. / Enviro-Tec 2.02 SINGLE-DUCT, VARIABLE-VOLUME AND CONSTANT-VOLUME UNITS A. General: 1. Factory-assembled, AHRI 880 (I-P) rated and bearing the AHRI seal, air volume control terminal with damper assembly, flow sensor, externally mounted volume controller, duct collars, and all required features. 2. Control box bearing identification, including but not necessarily limited to nominal cfm, maximum and minimum factory-set airflow limits, coil type and coil (right or left hand) connection, where applicable. B. Unit Casing: 1. Minimum 22 gage, 0.0299 inch galvanized steel. a. Assembled with longitudinal lock seam construction. b. Casing leakage to meet ASHRAE Std 130. 2. Air Inlet Collar:  Provide round, suitable for standard flexible duct sizes. 3. Unit Discharge:  Rectangular, with slip-and-drive connections. 4. Acceptable Liners: a. 1/2 inch thick, coated, fibrous-glass complying with ASTM C1071. 5. Secure with adhesive. 6. Coat edges exposed to airstream with NFPA 90A approved sealant. 7. Cover liner with non-porous foil. a. 3/4 inch (19 mm) thick polyurethane foam adhesive complying with UL 181 erosion requirements in accordance with ASHRAE Std 62.1, and having a maximum smoke developed index of 50 for both insulation and adhesive, when tested in accordance with ASTM E84. b. Liner not to contain pentabrominated diphenyl ether (CAS #32534-81-9) or octabrominated diphenyl ether. C. Sound Attenuator: 1. Provide if required to meet scheduled acoustical performance requirements. University of Connecticut AIR TERMINAL UNITS 23 3600 - 4 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2. Construction to consist of a continuous extension of the casing and liner as required to achieve required attenuation. 3. At 2000 fpm inlet velocity, the minimum operating pressure with attenuator added not to exceed 0.14 inch wg. D. Damper Assembly: 1. Heavy-gage, galvanized steel or extruded aluminum construction with solid steel, nickel-plated shaft pivoting on HDPE, self-lubricating bearings. 2. Provide integral position indicator or alternative method for indicating damper position over full range of 90 degrees. 3. Incorporate low leak damper blades for tight airflow shutoff. a. Air Leakage Past Closed Damper:  Maximum two percent of unit maximum airflow at 3 inch wg inlet static pressure, tested in accordance with ASHRAE Std 130. E. Hot Water Heating Coil: 1. Coil Casing:  Minimum 22 gage, 0.0299 inch galvanized steel, factory-installed on terminal discharge with rectangular outlet, duct connection type. a. Access Door:  Gasketed and insulated located on bottom, on top, and downstream of coils. b. Right or left coil inlets. 2. Coil Fins:  Aluminum or aluminum plated fins, mechanically-bonded to seamless copper tubes. 3. Coil leak tested to minimum 350 psig. a. Minimum Burst Pressure:  1800 psi. 4. Base performance data on tests run in accordance with AHRI 410 and units to bear AHRI 410 label. F. Electrical Requirements: 1. Single-point power connection. 2. Equipment wiring to comply with requirements of NFPA 70. G. Control Transformers:  Factory supplied and mounted for electric and electronic control applications. H. Controls: 1. DDC (Direct-Digital Controls): a. Basis of Design:  Price Industries, Inc.; Price Intelligent Controller. b. Include a factory-installed, unit-mounted, direct-digital controller that includes the following: 1) 24 VAC power terminal or RJ-12 Power connection. 2) T-Stat Port for thermostat connection. 3) Service Port for Price Linker diagnostic equipment. 4) Damper actuator. 5) Fan output connection. 6) LED indication for troubleshooting. 7) Three binary staged heating outputs. 8) Binary cooling output. 9) S.A.T. sensor input. 10) Contact closure input. University of Connecticut AIR TERMINAL UNITS 23 3600 - 5 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 11) Four analog outputs. 12) BACNET expansion module. c. VAV expansion module. d. Bi-directional Damper Actuator:  24 volt, powered closed, spring return open. e. Microprocessor-Based Controller:  Air volume controller, pressure-independent with electronic airflow transducers, factory-calibrated maximum and minimum airflow. f. Occupied and unoccupied operating mode. g. Remote reset of temperature or CFM set points. h. Proportional, plus integral control of room temperature. i. Monitoring and adjusting with portable terminal. j. Time-proportional reheat coil control. k. Room Sensor: 1) Compatible with temperature controls specified. 2) Wall-mounted, system powered, with temperature set-point adjustment including connection access for portable operator terminal. 2. Airflow Sensor:  Differential pressure airflow device measuring total, static, and wake pressures. a. Plastic parts shall be fire-resistant, complying with UL 94. b. Signal accuracy: within 5 percent throughout operating range with a 90 degree sheet metal elbow directly at the inlet of the assembly. c. Control tubing shall be protected by grommets at the wall of the air flow sensor's housing. d. Provide sensor with a pressure transducer to interface with a DDC system. e. Provide velocity pressure sensor with a removable access section for maintenance. f. Suitable for operation with duct pressures between 0.25 and 3.0 inch wg inlet static pressure. g. Include factory-mounted and piped, 5-micron filter; and adjustable, velocity-resetting, high-limit control with amplifying relay. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 EXAMINATION A. Verify that conditions are suitable for installation. B. Verify that field measurements are as shown on the drawings. 3.02 INSTALLATION A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Install the inlets of air terminal units and air flow sensors a minimum of four duct diameters from elbows, transitions, and duct takeoffs. C. See drawings for the size(s) and duct location(s) of the air terminal units. D. Provide ceiling access doors or locate units above easily removable ceiling components. E. Support units individually from structure with wire rope complying with ASTM A492 and ASTM A603 in accordance with SMACNA (SRM).  See Section 23 0548. 1. See Section 23 0548. University of Connecticut AIR TERMINAL UNITS 23 3600 - 6 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 F. Embed anchors in concrete in accordance with ASTM E488. G. Do not support from ductwork. H. Connect to ductwork in accordance with Section 23 3100. I. Provide minimum of 5 ft of 1 inch thick lined ductwork downstream of units. J. Install heating coils in accordance with Section 23 8200. K. Verify that electric power is available and of the correct characteristics. 3.03 ADJUSTING A. Reset volume with damper operator attached to assembly allowing flow range modulation from 100 percent of design flow to zero percent full flow. Set units with heating coils for minimum 50 percent full flow. 3.04 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Provide manufacturer's field representative to test, inspect, instruct, observe, and review field-assembled components and equipment installation, including connections and to assist in field testing.  Report results in writing. 1. Leak Test: a. After installation, fill water coils and test for leaks. b. Repair leaks and retest until no leaks exist. 2. Operational Test: a. After electrical circuitry has been energized, start units to confirm proper motor rotation and unit operation. b. Test and adjust controls and safeties. c. Replace damaged and malfunctioning controls and other equipment. d. Remove and replace malfunctioning units and retest as specified above. 3.05 CLEANING A. Vacuum clean coils and inside of units. B. Install new filters. END OF SECTION University of Connecticut AIR OUTLETS AND INLETS 23 3700 - 1 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 SECTION 233700 AIR OUTLETS AND INLETS PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Diffusers. B. Registers/grilles. C. Door grilles. D. Louvers. 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this section. B. Division  09: Painting C. Section 23 04 00 – General Conditions for Mechanical Trades D. Section 23 33 00 - Air Duct Accessories. 1.03 REFERENCE STANDARDS (FOLLOW THE MOST CURRENTLY ADOPTED AMENDED VERSION) A. AMCA 500-L - Laboratory Methods of Testing Louvers for Rating B. AMCA 511 - Certified Ratings Program for Air Control Devices. C. AMCA 540 – Debris Impact Resistance D. AMCA 550 - Test Method for High Velocity Wind Driven Rain Resistant Louvers. E. ASHRAE Std 70 - Method of Testing the Performance of Air Outlets and Inlets. F. ASTM B221 - Standard Specification for Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Extruded Bars, Rods, Wire, Profiles, and Tubes. G. ASTM B221M - Standard Specification for Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Extruded Bars, Rods, Wire, Profiles, and Tubes (Metric). H. SMACNA (ASMM) - Architectural Sheet Metal Manual. I. SMACNA (DCS) - HVAC Duct Construction Standards Metal and Flexible. 1.04 SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: Provide data for equipment required for this project.  Review outlets and inlets as to size, finish, and type of mounting prior to submission.  Submit schedule of outlets and inlets showing type, size, location, application, and noise level. B. Project Record Documents:  Record actual locations of all air outlets and inlets. C. Project Record Documents: Once the final Testing, Adjusting & Balancing Report is approved, record all typed airflow values on the as-built drawings. D. Test Reports: Rating of air outlet and inlet performance. E. Manufacturer's Certificate: Certify products meet or exceed specified requirements 1.05 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Project Record Documents: Record actual locations of air outlets and inlets. 1.06 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Test and rate air outlet and inlet performance in accordance with ASHRAE Std 70. University of Connecticut AIR OUTLETS AND INLETS 23 3700 - 2 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 B. Test and rate louver performance in accordance with AMCA 500-L. C. AMCA 540 – Debris Impact Resistance D. AMCA 550 - Test Method for High Velocity Wind Driven Rain Resistant Louvers; 2015. E. Manufacturer Qualifications:  Company specializing in manufacturing the type of products specified in this section, with minimum three years of documented experience. F. Maintain two copies of each document on site. 1.07 PRE-INSTALLATION MEETINGS A. Convene minimum one week prior to commencing work of this section. 1.08 WARRANTY A. Furnish five year manufacturer warranty for air outlets and inlets. 1.09 EXTRA MATERIALS A. Furnish one of each type and size extra air outlets and inlets. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 MANUFACTURERS A. The following list of manufacturers applies to all air terminal units unless otherwise noted in sections below. 1. Price Industries 2. Titus 3. Krueger 4. Nailor Industries 5. Anemostat 2.02 ROUND CEILING DIFFUSERS A. Type: Round, adjustable pattern, stamped or spun, multi-core diffuser to discharge air in 360 degree pattern, with directional baffles where indicated.  Diffuser collar shall project not more than 1 inch above ceiling.  In plaster ceilings, provide plaster ring and ceiling plaque. B. Fabrication:  Steel with baked enamel finish. C. Color:  As selected by Architect from manufacturer's standard range. D. Accessories:  Radial opposed blade damper and multi-louvered equalizing grid with damper adjustable from diffuser face. 2.03 RECTANGULAR CEILING DIFFUSERS A. Type: Provide square, stamped, multi-core, square, adjustable pattern, stamped, multi-core, square and rectangular, multi-louvered, square and rectangular, adjustable pattern, multi-louvered, and  diffuser to discharge air in 360 degree, one way, two way, three way, four way, and pattern with  directional baffles where indicated. B. Connections:  Round. C. Frame: Provide surface mount, snap-in, inverted T-bar, spline type. In plaster ceilings, provide plaster frame and ceiling frame. D. Fabrication:  Steel with baked enamel finish. E. Color:  As selected by Architect from manufacturer's standard range. University of Connecticut AIR OUTLETS AND INLETS 23 3700 - 3 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 F. Accessories:  Refer to schedule. 2.04 PERFORATED FACE CEILING DIFFUSERS A. Type: Perforated face with fully adjustable pattern and removable face. B. Frame: Surface mount type. In plaster ceilings, provide plaster frame and ceiling frame. C. Fabrication:  Steel with steel frame and baked enamel finish. D. Color:  As selected by Architect from manufacturer's standard range. E. Accessories:  Radial opposed blade damper and multi-louvered equalizing grid with damper adjustable from diffuser face. 2.05 CEILING SUPPLY REGISTERS/GRILLES A. Type: Streamlined and individually adjustable curved blades to discharge air along face of grille, one-way deflection. B. Frame: Refer to schedule. C. Construction:  Made of aluminum extrusions with factory enamel finish. D. Color:  As selected by Architect from manufacturer's standard range. E. Damper:  Integral, gang-operated, opposed blade type with removable key operator, operable from face. 2.06 CEILING EXHAUST AND RETURN REGISTERS/GRILLES A. Type: Frame:  Refer to schedule. B. Fabrication:  Steel with 20 gage, 0.0359 inch minimum frames and 22 gage, 0.0299 inch minimum blades, steel and aluminum with 20 gage, 0.0359 inch minimum frame, or aluminum extrusions, with factory baked enamel finish. C. Color:  To be selected by Architect from manufacturer's standard range. D. Damper:  Integral, gang-operated, opposed blade type with removable key operator, operable from face where not individually connected to exhaust fans. E. Gymnasiums: Provide front pivoted or welded in place blades, securely fastened to be immobile. 2.07 CEILING EGG CRATE EXHAUST AND RETURN GRILLES A. Type: Refer to schedule. B. Fabrication:   Refer to schedule. C. Color:  To be selected by Architect from manufacturer's standard range. D. Frame: Refer to schedule. E. Frame: Channel lay-in frame for suspended grid ceilings. F. Accessories:  Refer to schedule. 2.08 WALL SUPPLY REGISTERS/GRILLES A. Type: Refer to schedule. B. Frame: Refer to schedule. C. Color:  To be selected by Architect from manufacturer's standard range. D. Damper:  Integral, gang-operated opposed blade type with removable key operator, operable from face. University of Connecticut AIR OUTLETS AND INLETS 23 3700 - 4 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 E. Gymnasiums: Provide front pivoted or welded in place blades, securely fastened to be immobile. 2.09 WALL SUPPLY REGISTERS/GRILLES A. Type: Refer to schedule. B. Frame: Refer to schedule. C. Fabrication:  Aluminum extrusions with factory clear lacquer finish. D. Color:  To be selected by Architect from manufacturer's standard range. E. Damper:  Integral, gang-operated, opposed blade type with removable key operator, operable from face. 2.10 WALL EXHAUST AND RETURN REGISTERS/GRILLES A. Type: Streamlined blades, 3/4 inch minimum depth, 3/4 inch maximum spacing, with spring or other device to set blades, vertical face. B. Frame: 1-1/4 inch margin with countersunk screw mounting. C. Fabrication:  Steel frames and blades, with factory baked enamel finish. D. Color:  As shown on the drawings. E. Color:  To be selected by Architect from manufacturer's standard range. F. Damper:  Integral, gang-operated, opposed blade type with removable key operator, operable from face. G. Gymnasiums: Provide front pivoted or welded in place blades, securely fastened to be immobile. 2.11 WALL GRID CORE EXHAUST AND RETURN REGISTERS/GRILLES A. Type: Fixed grilles of 1/2 by 1/2 by 1/2 inch louvers. B. Fabrication:  Aluminum with factory clear lacquer finish. C. Color:  As shown on the drawings. D. Color:  To be selected by Architect from manufacturer's standard range. E. Frame: 1-1/4 inch margin with countersunk screw mounting. F. Frame: Channel lay-in frame for suspended grid ceilings. G. Damper:  Integral, gang-operated, opposed blade type with removable key operator, operable from face. 2.12 LOUVERS A. Type: 4 inch deep with blades on 45 degree slope with center baffle and return bend, heavy channel frame, 1/2 inch square mesh screen over exhaust and 1/2 inch square mesh screen over intake. B. Fabrication:  16 gage, 0.0598 inch thick galvanized steel welded assembly, with factory prime coat finish. C. Color:  As shown on the drawings. D. Color:  To be selected by Architect from manufacturer's standard range. E. Fabrication:  12 gage, 0.1046 inch thick extruded aluminum, welded assembly, with factory prime coat finish. F. Color:  As shown on the drawings. University of Connecticut AIR OUTLETS AND INLETS 23 3700 - 5 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 G. Color:  To be selected by Architect from manufacturer's standard range. H. Mounting:  Furnish with interior flat flange for installation. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 EXAMINATION A. Division 1 - Administrative Requirements: Coordination and project conditions. B. Verify inlet and outlet locations. C. Verify ceiling, wall systems are ready for installation. 3.02 INSTALLATION A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Comply with SMACNA (ASMM) for flashing/counter-flashing of roof penetrations and supports for roof curbs and roof mounted equipment. C. Check location of outlets and inlets and make necessary adjustments in position to conform with architectural features, symmetry, and lighting arrangement. D. Install diffusers to ductwork with air tight connection. E. Provide balancing dampers on duct take-off to diffusers, and grilles and registers, despite whether dampers are specified as part of the diffuser, or grille and register assembly. Refer to Section 23 33 00. F. Paint ductwork visible behind air outlets and inlets matte black.  Refer to Division 09. 3.03 AIR OUTLET AND INLET SCHEDULE A. Refer to contract drawings/plans. 3.04 INTERFACE WITH OTHER PRODUCTS A. Check location of outlets and inlets and make necessary adjustments in position to conform to architectural features, symmetry, and lighting arrangement. END OF SECTION University of Connecticut HEAT EXCHANGERS FOR HVAC 23 5700 - 1 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 SECTION 235700 HEAT EXCHANGERS FOR HVAC PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Shell and tube type heat exchangers 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this section. B. Division 03 - Cast-in-Place Concrete related sections. C. Section 23 04 00 – General Conditions for Mechanical Trades D. Section 23 05 29 - Hangers and Supports for HVAC Piping and Equipment: Execution requirements for heat exchanger supports specified by this section. E. Section 23 07 00 - HVAC Insulation: Field applied insulation for heat exchangers. F. Section 23 21 13 - Hydronic Piping: Product requirements for hydronic piping connected to heat exchangers. G. Section 23 21 16 - Hydronic Piping Specialties: Product requirements for heat exchanger trim for placement by this section. H. Section 23 22 13 - Steam and Condensate Heating Piping: Product requirements for steam supply and steam condensate return piping connected to heat exchangers. 1.03 REFERENCE STANDARDS (FOLLOW THE MOST CURRENTLY ADOPTED AMENDEDVERSION) A. American Society of Mechanical Engineers: 1. ASME Section VIII - Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code - Pressure Vessels. 1.04 SUBMITTALS A. Shop Drawings: Indicate dimensions, locations, size of taps, tube-removal space and support frame. B. Product Data: Submit performance data. C. Test Reports: Indicate shop test reports of tube bundle shop pressure tests. D. Manufacturer's Certificate: Certify Products to meet or exceed specified requirements. 1.05 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Operation and Maintenance Data: Submit start-up and shut down instructions, assembly drawings, and spare parts lists. 1.06 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Maintain one copy of each document on site. B. ASME Compliance:  Fabricate and label heat exchangers to comply with ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code:  Section VIII, "Pressure Vessels," Division 01. 1.07 QUALIFICATIONS A. Manufacturer: Manufacturer: Company specializing in manufacturing Products specified in this section with minimum three years documented experience. University of Connecticut HEAT EXCHANGERS FOR HVAC 23 5700 - 2 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1.08 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Accept heat exchangers on site in factory protective packaging. Inspect for damage. B. Protect openings with temporary caps to prevent entry of foreign material. 1.09 WARRANTY A. Furnish five year manufacturer’s warranty for heat exchangers PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 SHELL AND TUBE TYPE HEAT EXCHANGERS A. Manufacturers: 1. Armstrong 2. ITT Bell & Gossett 3. Patterson-Kelley Co. 4. Taco B. Tubes: U-tube type seamless copper tubes suitable for 125 psig Working pressure. C. Shell: Steel with threaded or flanged piping connections and necessary taps for thermometer wells and drains, steel saddle and attaching U-bolts, prime painted. D. Heads: Cast iron or fabricated steel with steel tube sheets, threaded or flanged for piping connections. E. Baffles: Steel F. Water Chamber and Tube Bundle: Removable for inspection and cleaning. G. Design: Heating fluid in shell and heated fluid in tubes. H. Support Saddles: Fabricated of material similar to shell. Foot mount with provision for anchoring to support. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 INSTALLATION A. Install with clearance to permit removal of tube bundle with minimum disturbance to installed equipment and piping. B. Support shell type heat exchangers on saddle supports. C. Make connections to heat exchangers with unions or flanges. D. Install shell type heat exchanger to allow draining and install drain connection at low point. E. Install piping from relief valve to nearest floor drain. F. Install water to water heat exchanger with the following piping accessories on hot water piping connections, and in accordance with details as indicated on Drawings. 1. On supply: a. Thermometer well and thermometer. b. Well for control system temperature sensor. c. Shutoff valve. d. Strainer. e. Control valve. f. Pressure gage. University of Connecticut HEAT EXCHANGERS FOR HVAC 23 5700 - 3 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2. On return: a. Thermometer well and thermometer. b. Well for control system temperature sensor. c. Pressure gage. d. Shutoff valve. e. Balancing valve. G. Install steam to water heat exchanger with the following trim, and in accordance with details as indicated on Drawings: 1. Pressure gage on shell tapping with pigtail siphon. 2. Vacuum breaker. H. Install steam to water heat exchanger with the following piping accessories on steam piping connections, and in accordance with details as indicated on Drawings 1. On supply: a. Shutoff valve. b. Strainer. c. Control valve. d. Pressure gage. 2. On return: a. Steam trap. b. Shutoff valve. 3.02 CLEANING A. After completing system installation, including outlet fitting and devices, inspect exposed finish.  Remove burrs, dirt, and construction debris and repair damaged finishes. END OF SECTION University of Connecticut PACKAGED ROOFTOP AIR CONDITIONING UNITS 23 7416 - 1 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 SECTION 237416 PACKAGED ROOFTOP AIR CONDITIONING UNITS PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Packaged Rooftop Air Conditioning Units – Small Capacity Range (3-10 ton) B. Packaged Rooftop Air Conditioning Units – Medium Capacity Range (10-60 ton) C. Packaged Rooftop Air Conditioning Units – Large Capacity Range (60+ ton) 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS: A. Drawings and general provisions of the contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this section. 1.03 REFERENCES (FOLLOW THE MOST CURRENTLY ADOPTED AMENDED VERSION) A. Air-Conditioning and Refrigeration Institute: 1. ARI 210/240 - Unitary Air-Conditioning and Air-Source Heat Pump Equipment. 2. ARI 270 - Sound Rating of Outdoor Unitary Equipment. 3. ARI 340/360 - Commercial and Industrial Unitary Air-Conditioning and Heat Pump Equipment. B. Air Movement and Control Association International, Inc.: 1. AMCA 500 - Test Methods for Louvers, Dampers, and Shutters. C. American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers: 1. ASHRAE 52.1 - Gravimetric and Dust-Spot Procedures for Testing Air-Cleaning Devices Used in General Ventilation for Removing Particulate Matter. 2. ASHRAE 62 - Ventilation for Acceptable Indoor Air Quality. 3. ASHRAE 90.1 - Energy Standard for Buildings Except Low-Rise Residential Buildings. D. ASTM International: 1. ASTM B117 - Standard Practice for Operating Salt Spray (Fog) Apparatus. E. National Fire Protection Association: 1. NFPA 54 - National Fuel Gas Code. 2. NFPA 58 - Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code. 3. NFPA 90A - Standard for the Installation of Air Conditioning and Ventilating Systems. 1.04 DEFINITIONS A. Energy Efficiency Ratio (EER) - Ratio of net cooling capacity in Btuh to total rate of electric input in watts under designated operating conditions. B. Seasonal Energy Efficiency Ratio (SEER) - Total cooling output of an air conditioner during its normal annual usage period for cooling (in Btu) divided by total electric energy input during the same period (in Wh). 1.05 SUBMITTALS A. No equipment shall be fabricated or delivered until the receipt of approved shop drawings from the Owner or Owner’s approved representative. B. Product Data: Submit data indicating: University of Connecticut PACKAGED ROOFTOP AIR CONDITIONING UNITS 23 7416 - 2 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1. Published Literature: Indicate capacities, ratings, gages and finishes of materials, and electrical characteristics and connection requirements. 2. Filters: Data for filter media, filter performance data, filter assembly, and filter frames. 3. Fans: Performance and fan curves with specified operating point plotted, power, RPM. 4. Sound data shall be provided using ARI 260 test methods.  Unit discharge, inlet, and radiated sound power levels in dB shall be provided for 63, 125, 250, 500, 1000, 2000, 4000, and 8000 Hz. 5. Dampers: Include leakage, pressure drop, and sample calibration curves. Indicate materials, construction, dimensions, and installation details. 6. Electrical Requirements: Power supply wiring including wiring diagrams for interlock and control wiring. Indicate factory installed and field installed wiring. 7. Dimensions. 8. Weights. C. Test Reports: Submit results of factory test at time of unit shipment. D. Manufacturer's Installation Instructions: Submit assembly, support details, connection requirements, and include start-up instructions. E. Manufacturer's Certificate: Certify products meet or exceed specified requirements. F. Manufacturer’s Field Reports: Submit start-up report for each unit. 1.06 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Operation and Maintenance Data: Submit manufacturer's descriptive literature, operating instructions, installation instructions, and maintenance and repair data. 1.07 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Cooling Capacity: Rate in accordance with [ARI 210/240 for units up to 65,000 btu/h] [ARI 340/360 for units 65,000 btu to 250,000 btu]. B. Sound Rating: Measure in accordance with ARI 270. C. Insulation and adhesives: Meet requirements of NFPA 90A. D. Performance Requirements: Conform to minimum EER and/or SEER prescribed by ASHRAE 90.1 when tested in accordance with [ARI 210/240 for units up to 65,000 btu/h and/or ARI 340/360 for units 65,000 btu to 250,000 btu. E. Outside Air Damper Leakage: Test in accordance with AMCA 500. F. Listed and classified by UL as suitable for the purpose specified and indicated. 1.08 QUALIFICATIONS A. Manufacturer: Company specializing in manufacturing products specified in this section with minimum three years documented experience. B. Installer: Company specializing in performing Work of this section with minimum three years documented experience. 1.09 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Accept products on site in factory-fabricated protective containers, with factory-installed shipping skids and lifting lugs.  Inspect for damage. University of Connecticut PACKAGED ROOFTOP AIR CONDITIONING UNITS 23 7416 - 3 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 B. Store in clean dry place and protect from weather and construction traffic.  Protect units from damage by storing off roof until roof mounting curbs are in place. C. Do not operate units until ductwork is clean, filters are in place, bearings lubricated, and fan has been test run under observation. 1.10 COORDINATION A. Coordinate installation of roof curbs with roof structure, roof deck and roof membrane installation. 1.11 WARRANTY A. Furnish five year manufacturers warranty for compressors. B. Furnish five year manufacturers warranty for heat exchangers. 1.12 EXTRA MATERIALS A. Furnish one set of fan belts for each belt driven fan. B. Furnish one extra set of filters after substantial completion for each unit. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 ROOFTOP AIR CONDITIONING UNITS – SMALL CAPACITY (3 TO 10 TON) A. Manufacturers: 1. The Trane Company 2. Aaon Incorporated 3. Daikin 4. Valent B. Product Description: Self-contained, packaged, factory assembled and wired, consisting of roof curb, cabinet, supply fan, refrigerant cooling coil, compressor, refrigeration circuit, condenser, hot water heating coil, air filters, mixed air casing, controls, and accessories. C. Configuration: As indicated on Drawing. D. Roof Mounting Curb: Refer to Section 230548. 1. Provide vibration isolation or seismic curb. a. Provide sloped curb as required for level installation on sloped roof. E. Cabinet: 1. Designed for outdoor installation with weatherproof construction. 2. Panels: Constructed of galvanized steel with baked enamel finish meeting salt spray test in accordance with ASTM B117. Furnish access doors or removable access panels. 3. Insulation: Factory applied to exposed vertical and horizontal panels. 1/2 inch thick aluminum foil faced glass fiber with edges protected from erosion. 4. The base of the unit shall have provisions for forklift and crane lifting. F. Supply Fan: Forward curved centrifugal type, direct drive. Motor permanently lubricated with built-in thermal overload protection. Unit shall have factory installed variable speed drive for modulation of the blower motor. The VSDs shall be factory-programmed for unit-specific requirements and shall not require additional field programming to operate. G. Compressor: University of Connecticut PACKAGED ROOFTOP AIR CONDITIONING UNITS 23 7416 - 4 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1. Hermetically sealed, direct-drive, scroll compressor(s) with positive lubrication and internal motor overload protection. 2. Accessories: Compressors shall include crankcase heaters, internal pressure relief, temperature and current sensitive overloads, internal vibration isolators, short cycle protection. H. Refrigeration System: 1. Each circuit shall have independent fixed orifice or thermostatic expansion device, filter-drier, service valves with gauge ports, high and low pressure safety controls. Dehydrate and factory charge each circuit with oil and refrigerant. For heat pump units, provide reversing valve, discharge muffler, flow control check valve, and electronic time initiated, temperature terminated defrost control I. Condenser: 1. Coil: Copper tubes expanded onto aluminum fins with coil guard. Factory leak tested and pressure tested. 2. Condenser Fan(s): Direct drive propeller fans statically and dynamically balanced. Wired to operate with compressor. Motor permanently lubricated with built-in thermal overload protection. Furnish high efficiency fan motors. J. Evaporator Coil: 1. Coil: AHRI certified, copper tubes expanded onto aluminum fins. Factory leak tested and pressure tested. 2. Drain Pan: Provide drain pan with piping connection. K. Hot Water Heating Coil: Constructed of copper tubes expanded into aluminum fins. Factory leak tested under water. L. Air Filters: 2 inch thick pleated MERV-13 glass fiber disposable media in metal frames. M. Mixed Air Casing: 1. Outside Air Damper Leakage: Maximum 3.0 cfm per square foot at 1.0 inches wg pressure differential. 2. Outside Air Damper: Automatic, two position. Interlocked to open when supply fan starts. Outside air damper normally closed and return air damper normally open. Furnish rain hood with screen. N. DDC Controls: Provide DDC controller with integral LCD screen that provides text readouts of status, operating settings and alarm conditions. DDC controller shall have a built-in keypad to permit operator to access read-out screens and change settings without the use of ancillary equipment, devices or software. DDC controller shall be factory-programmed to communicate with the building automation system (BAS) via BACnet. Through this BAS interface module, all functions, as specified in Sequence of Operations Specification Section shall be performed. See Building Automation and Automatic Temperature Control System Specifications. O. Provide the following Factory Accessories: 1. Convenience Outlet: Factory installed, 115 volt, 15 amp, GFCI type, internally mounted. 2. Supply Fan VFD (Variable Frequency Drive) on Indoor fan motor.  VFD shall change fan speed according to mode of operation. 3. Furnish condenser coil with corrosion resistant coating capable of withstanding salt spray test of 1000 hours in accordance with ASTM B117. University of Connecticut PACKAGED ROOFTOP AIR CONDITIONING UNITS 23 7416 - 5 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 4. Condensate Overflow Switch: This option shall shut the unit down in the event that a clogged condensate drain line prevents proper condensate removal from the unit. 5. Hinged Access Doors: Provide sheet metal hinges on the Filter/Evaporator Access Door and the Compressor/Control Access Door. 6. Stainless Steel Drain: Drain pan shall be constructed of 304 stainless steel. 7. Supply and Return Smoke Detector 8. Clogged Filter/Fan Failure Switch: A dedicated differential pressure switch shall be provided to achieve active fan failure indication and/or clogged filter indication. 9. Economizer: Factory installed fully modulating motorized outside air and return air dampers controlled by enthalpy controller with minimum position setting. Outside air damper normally closed and return air damper normally open. Furnish barometric relief damper with powered exhaust. Furnish rain hood with screen. Provide economizer components and controls in accordance with IECC. 10. Low ambient cooling: Furnish control to provide low ambient cooling to 0 degrees F 11. Furnish low limit thermostat in supply air to close outside air damper and stop supply fan. 2.02 ROOFTOP AIR CONDITIONING UNITS – MEDIUM CAPACITY (10 TO 60 TON) A. Manufacturers: 1. The Trane Company 2. Aaon Incorporated 3. Daikin – 4. Valent B. Product Description: Self-contained, packaged, factory assembled and wired, consisting of roof curb, cabinet, supply fan, refrigerant cooling coil, compressor, refrigeration circuit, condenser, hot water heating coil, air filters, mixed air casing, controls, and accessories. C. Configuration: As indicated on Drawings. D. Roof Mounting Curb: Refer to Section 230548. 1. Provide vibration isolation or seismic curb. a. Provide sloped curb as required for level installation on sloped roof. E. Cabinet: 1. Designed for outdoor installation with weatherproof construction. 2. Panels: Constructed of galvanized steel with baked enamel finish meeting salt spray test in accordance with ASTM B117. Furnish access doors or removable access panels. 3. Insulation: Factory applied to exposed vertical and horizontal panels. 2 inch thick neoprene coated glass fiber with edges protected from erosion. 4. The base of the unit shall have provisions for forklift and crane lifting. F. Supply Fan: Forward curved centrifugal type, belt drive with adjustable motor sheaves. Motor permanently lubricated with built-in thermal overload protection. Unit shall have factory installed variable speed drive for modulation of the blower motor. The VSDs shall be factory-programmed for unit-specific requirements and shall not require additional field programming to operate. University of Connecticut PACKAGED ROOFTOP AIR CONDITIONING UNITS 23 7416 - 6 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 G. Compressor: 1. Hermetically sealed, direct-drive, scroll compressors with positive lubrication and internal motor overload protection. 2. Quantity and type: Provide dual compressors with variable speed 1st stage compressor. 3. Accessories: Compressors shall include crankcase heaters, internal pressure relief, temperature and current sensitive overloads, internal vibration isolators, short cycle protection. H. Refrigeration System: 1. Each circuit shall have independent fixed orifice or thermostatic expansion device, filter-drier, service valves with gauge ports, high and low pressure safety controls. Dehydrate and factory charge each circuit with oil and refrigerant. For heat pump units, provide reversing valve, discharge muffler, flow control check valve, and electronic time initiated, temperature terminated defrost control I. Condenser: 1. Coil: Copper tubes expanded onto aluminum fins with coil guard. Factory leak tested to 500 psig and pressure tested to 500 psig. 2. Condenser Fan(s): Direct drive propeller fans statically and dynamically balanced. Wired to operate with compressor. Motor permanently lubricated with built-in thermal overload protection. Furnish high efficiency fan motors. J. Evaporator Coil: 1. Coil: AHRI certified, copper tubes expanded onto aluminum fins. Factory leak tested to 500 psig and pressure tested to 500 psig. 2. Drain Pan: Provide drain pan with piping connection. K. Hot Water Heating Coil: Constructed of copper tubes expanded into aluminum fins. Factory leak tested under water. L. Air Filters: 2 inch thick pleated MERV-13 glass fiber disposable media in metal frames. M. Mixed Air Casing: 1. Outside Air Damper Leakage: Maximum 3.0 cfm per square foot at 1.0 inches wg pressure differential. 2. Outside Air Damper: Automatic, two position. Interlocked to open when supply fan starts. Outside air damper normally closed and return air damper normally open. Furnish rain hood with screen. N. DDC Controls: Provide DDC controller with integral LCD screen that provides text readouts of status, operating settings and alarm conditions. DDC controller shall have a built-in keypad to permit operator to access read-out screens and change settings without the use of ancillary equipment, devices or software. DDC controller shall be factory-programmed to communicate with the building automation system (BAS) via BACnet. Through this BAS interface module, all functions, as specified in Sequence of Operations Specification Section shall be performed. See Building Automation and Automatic Temperature Control System Specifications. O. Provide the following Factory Accessories: 1. Convenience Outlet: Factory installed, 115 volt, 15 amp, GFCI type, internally mounted. University of Connecticut PACKAGED ROOFTOP AIR CONDITIONING UNITS 23 7416 - 7 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2. Supply Fan VFD (Variable Frequency Drive) on Indoor fan motor.  VFD shall change fan speed according to mode of operation. 3. Furnish condenser coil with corrosion resistant coating capable of withstanding salt spray test of 1000 hours in accordance with ASTM B117. 4. Condensate Overflow Switch: This option shall shut the unit down in the event that a clogged condensate drain line prevents proper condensate removal from the unit. 5. Hinged Access Doors: Provide sheet metal hinges on the Filter/Evaporator Access Door and the Compressor/Control Access Door. 6. Stainless Steel Drain: Drain pan shall be constructed of 304 stainless steel. 7. Supply and Return Smoke Detector 8. Clogged Filter/Fan Failure Switch: A dedicated differential pressure switch shall be provided to achieve active fan failure indication and/or clogged filter indication. 9. Economizer: Factory installed fully modulating motorized outside air and return air dampers controlled by enthalpy controller with minimum position setting. Outside air damper normally closed and return air damper normally open. Furnish barometric relief damper with powered exhaust. Furnish rain hood with screen. Provide economizer components and controls in accordance with IECC. 10. Low ambient cooling: Furnish control to provide low ambient cooling to 0 degrees F 11. Furnish low limit thermostat in supply air to close outside air damper and stop supply fan. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 EXAMINATION A. Verify roof curbs are installed and ready to receive units. 3.02 PREPARATION A. Furnish roof curbs. Refer to Section 23 05 48 for installation. 3.03 INSTALLATION - GENERAL A. Mount units on factory built roof mounting frame providing watertight enclosure to protect ductwork and utility services. Install roof mounting curb level. B. Connect units to supply and return ductwork with flexible connections. C. Install condensate piping with trap and route from drain pan to nearest roof drain. D. Install components furnished loose for field mounting. E. Install electrical devices furnished loose for field mounting. F. Install control wiring between unit and field installed accessories. G. Locate remote panels as indicated on Drawings. 3.04 INSTALLATION - HOT WATER HEATING COIL A. Make connections to coils with unions or flanges. B. Connect water supply to leaving airside of coil (counter flow arrangement). C. Locate water supply at bottom of supply header and return water connection at top. D. Install water coils to allow draining and install drain connection at low points. University of Connecticut PACKAGED ROOFTOP AIR CONDITIONING UNITS 23 7416 - 8 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 E. Install valves and piping specialties in accordance with details as indicated on Drawings. F. Install manual air vents at high points complete with shutoff valve. Refer to Section 23 21 13. G. Install hot water piping accessories below roof. 3.05 MANUFACTURER'S FIELD SERVICES A. Furnish initial start-up and shutdown during first year of operation, including routine servicing and checkout. 3.06 CLEANING A. Vacuum clean coils and inside of unit cabinet. B. Install temporary filters during construction period. Replace with permanent filters at Substantial Completion. 1. For multi-phase projects protect filters for total duration of project. Inspect weekly and provide new filters quarterly [as required]. 3.07 DEMONSTRATION A. Demonstrate unit operation and maintenance. B. Furnish services of manufacturer's technical representative for one 8 hour day to instruct Owner's personnel in operation and maintenance of units. Schedule training with Owner, provide at least 7 days notice to Architect/Engineer of training date. END OF SECTION University of Connecticut CONVECTION HEATING AND COOLING UNITS 23 8200 - 1 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 SECTION 238200 CONVECTION HEATING AND COOLING UNITS PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Unit heaters. B. Cabinet unit heaters. C. Hydronic radiant heaters. D. Electric Unit Heaters 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this section. B. Division 23 specifications 1.03 REFERENCE STANDARDS (FOLLOW THE MOST CURRENTLY ADOPTED AMENDEDVERSION) A. Air-Conditioning and Refrigeration Institute: 1. ARI 410 - Forced-Circulation Air-Cooling and Air-Heating Coils. B. Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors: 1. SMACNA - HVAC Duct Construction Standard - Metal and Flexible. 1.04 SUBMITTALS A. Shop Drawings: Indicate cross sections of cabinets, grilles, bracing and reinforcing, and typical elevations. Indicate schedules of equipment and enclosures typically indicating length and number of pieces of element and enclosure, corner pieces, end caps, cap strips, access doors, pilaster covers. B. Product Data: Submit coil and frame configurations, dimensions, materials, rows, connections, and rough-in dimensions. Submit mechanical and electrical service locations, capacities and accessories or optional items. C. Manufacturer's Installation Instructions: Submit assembly, support details, and connection requirements. D. Manufacturer's Certificate: Certify products meet or exceed specified requirements. 1.05 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Project Record Documents: Record actual locations of components and locations of access doors in radiation cabinets required for access to valves. B. Operation and Maintenance Data: Submit manufacturer’s descriptive literature, operating instructions, installation instructions, maintenance and repair data, and parts listings. 1.06 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, Article 100, by a testing agency acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction, and marked for intended use. University of Connecticut CONVECTION HEATING AND COOLING UNITS 23 8200 - 2 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1.07 QUALIFICATIONS A. Manufacturer: Company specializing in manufacturing products specified in this section with minimum three years documented experience. B. Installer: Company specializing in performing Work of this section with minimum three years documented experience. 1.08 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Accept units on site in factory packing. Inspect for damage. Store under roof. B. Protect coil fins from crushing and bending by leaving in shipping cases until installation, and by storing indoors. Protect coils from entry of dirt and debris with pipe caps or plugs. 1.09 FIELD MEASUREMENTS A. Verify field measurements prior to fabrication. 1.10 EXTRA MATERIALS A. Furnish two sets of filters PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 UNIT HEATERS A. Manufacturers: 1. Vulcan 2. Sterling 3. Modine 4. Trane B. Coils: Seamless copper tubing, 0.025 inch minimum wall thickness, silver brazed to steel headers, and with evenly spaced aluminum fins mechanically bonded to tubing. C. Casing: 0.0478-inch thick steel with threaded pipe connections for hanger rods. D. Finish: Factory applied baked enamel of color as selected. E. Fan: Direct drive propeller type, statically and dynamically balanced, with fan guard; horizontal models with permanently lubricated sleeve bearings; vertical models with grease lubricated ball bearings. F. Air Outlet: Adjustable pattern diffuser on projection models and four-way louvers on horizontal throw models. G. Motor: Permanently lubricated sleeve bearings on horizontal models, grease lubricated ball bearings on vertical models. H. Control: Local disconnect switch. 2.02 CABINET UNIT HEATERS A. Manufacturers: 1. Trane 2. Vulcan 3. Sterling 4. Modine B. Coils: Evenly spaced aluminum fins mechanically bonded to copper tubes, designed for 100 psi and 220 degrees F. University of Connecticut CONVECTION HEATING AND COOLING UNITS 23 8200 - 3 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 C. Cabinet: 0.0598 inch thick steel with exposed corners and edges rounded, easily removed panels, glass fiber insulation and integral air outlet and inlet grilles. D. Finish: Factory applied baked enamel of color as selected on visible surfaces of enclosure or cabinet. E. Fans: Centrifugal forward-curved double-width wheels, statically and dynamically balanced, direct driven. F. Motor: Tap wound multiple speed ECM with sleeve bearings, resiliently mounted. G. Control: Multiple speed switch, factory wired, located in cabinet. H. Filter: Easily removed 1 inch thick glass fiber throw-away type, located to filter air before coil. I. Mixing Dampers: Where indicated, mixing sections with dampers. 2.03 HYDRONIC RADIANT HEATERS A. Manufacturers: 1. Sun-El 2. Aero Tech 3. Shelley 4. Air Tech 5. Sterling B. Ceiling Panels: Constructed of modular aluminum extrusions with interlocking edges, manufactured and assembled to sizes and configurations indicated. C. Pipe Coil: incorporate continuous 1/2 inch copper pipe into extruded void. Furnish return bends for two water connections to each panel. D. Cross brace entire assembly with structural members and insulate with 1 inch thick fiberglass insulation. Configure panels within T-bar ceiling module and run wall to wall. 2.04 ELECTRIC UNIT HEATERS A. Manufacturers: 1. Modine 2. QMark 3. Indeeco B. Assembly: UL listed and labeled assembly with terminal box and cover, and built-in controls. C. Heating Elements: Enclosed copper tube, aluminum finned element of coiled nickel-chrome resistance wire centered in tubes and embedded in refractory material or exposed helical coil of nickel-chrome resistance wire with refractory ceramic support bushings. D. Cabinet: steel with integral air outlet grilles. E. Element Hangers: Quiet operating, ball bearing cradle type providing unrestricted longitudinal movement, on enclosure brackets. F. Fan: Direct-drive propeller type, statically and dynamically balanced, with fan guard. G. Motor: Permanently lubricated, sleeve bearings for horizontal models; ball bearings for vertical models. University of Connecticut CONVECTION HEATING AND COOLING UNITS 23 8200 - 4 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 H. Control: Separate fan speed switch and thermostat heat selector switch, factory wired, with switches built-in behind cover. Furnish thermal overload. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 EXAMINATION A. For recessed units, verify recess dimensions are correct size. B. Verify wall construction is ready for installation. C. Verify ductwork is ready for installation. D. Verify concealed blocking and supports are in place and connections are correctly located. 3.02 INSTALLATION A. Protect coils to prevent damage to fins and flanges. Comb out bent fins. B. Install coils level. C. Make connections to coils with unions and flanges. D. On water coils, install shut-off valve on supply piping and balancing valve on return piping. Locate water supply at bottom of supply header and return water connection at top. Install manual air vents at high points. Install water coils to be drainable and install drain connection at low points. E. On water and glycol heating coils, connect water supply piping to leaving airside of coil (counter flow arrangement). F. Insulate headers located outside airflow, insulate as specified for piping. G. Install equipment exposed to finished areas after walls and ceilings are finished and painted. Avoid damage. H. Protection: Install finished cabinet units with protective covers during remainder of construction. I. Unit Heaters: Hang from building structure, with pipe hangers anchored to building, not from piping. Mount as high as possible to maintain greatest headroom unless otherwise indicated. J. Hydronic Units: Install with shut-off valve on supply piping and balancing valve on return piping. Where not accessible, extend vent to exterior surface of cabinet for servicing. K. Units with Cooling Coils: Install drain piping to drain. 3.03 CLEANING A. After construction is completed, including painting, clean exposed surfaces of units. Vacuum clean coils and inside of cabinets. B. Touch-up marred or scratched surfaces of factory-finished cabinets, using finish materials furnished by manufacturer. C. Install new filters after commissioning. University of Connecticut CONVECTION HEATING AND COOLING UNITS 23 8200 - 5 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 END OF SECTION University of Connecticut HUMIDITY CONTROL EQUIPMENT 23 8400 -1 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 SECTION 238400 HUMIDITY CONTROL EQUIPMENT PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SUMMARY A. Section Includes: 1. Natatorium Dehumidification Unit B. Related Sections: 1. Section 22 11 00 -Facility Water Distribution: Execution requirements for cold water supply to units specified by this section. 2. Section 23 04 00 – General Conditions for Mechanical Trades 3. Section 23 05 29 -Hangers and Supports for HVAC Piping and Equipment: Product requirements for supports for steam grid humidifiers for placement by this section. 4. Section 23 07 00 -HVAC Insulation: Execution requirements for insulating humidifier casings specified by this section. 5. Section 23 09 00 -Instrumentation and Control for HVAC: Product requirements for control components used by humidity control equipment. 6. Section 23 09 23 -Direct-Digital Control System for HVAC: Product requirements for control components used by humidity control equipment. 7. Section 23 09 93 -Sequence of Operations for HVAC Controls: Sequences of operation for humidity control equipment. 8. Section 23 21 13 -Hydronic Piping: Execution requirements for connection of chilled water and hot water to units specified by this section. 9. Section 23 25 00 -HVAC Water Treatment: Product and execution requirements for chemical treatment equipment. 10. Section 23 31 00 -HVAC Ducts and Casings: Execution requirements for ducts specified by this section. 11. Section 26 05 03 -Equipment Wiring Connections: Execution requirements for electrical connections to units specified by this section. 1.02 REFERENCES A. Air-Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Institute: 1. AHRI 410 -Forced-Circulation Air-Cooling and Air-Heating Coils. 2. ARI 270 -Sound Rating of Outdoor Unitary Equipment. 3. ARI 340/360 -Commercial and Industrial Unitary Air-Conditioning and Heat Pump Equipment. B. National Electrical Manufacturers Association: 1. NEMA 250 -Enclosures for Electrical Equipment (1000 Volts Maximum). 2. NEMA MG 1 -Motors and Generators. C. Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors: 1. SMACNA -HVAC Duct Construction Standard -Metal and Flexible. D. Underwriters Laboratories Inc.: 1. UL 900 -Air Filter Units. E. Air Movement and Control Association International, Inc.: University of Connecticut HUMIDITY CONTROL EQUIPMENT 23 8400 -2 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1. AMCA 500 -Test Methods for Louvers, Dampers, and Shutters. F. American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers: 1. ASHRAE 15 -Safety Standard for Mechanical Refrigeration. 2. ASHRAE 52.1 -Gravimetric and Dust-Spot Procedures for Testing Air-Cleaning Devices Used in General Ventilation for Removing Particulate Matter. 3. ASHRAE 90.1 -Energy Standard for Buildings Except Low-Rise Residential Buildings. G. ASTM International: 1. ASTM B117 -Standard Practice for Operating Salt Spray (Fog) Apparatus. 1.03 DEFINITIONS A. Energy Efficiency Ratio (EER) -Ratio of net cooling capacity in Btuh to total rate of electric input in watts under designated operating conditions. 1.04 SUBMITTALS A. Section 01 33 00 -Submittal Procedures: Submittal procedures. B. Product Data: Submit data indicating: 1. Cooling and heating capacities. 2. Dimensions. 3. Weights. 4. Rough-in connections and connection requirements. 5. Duct connections. 6. Electrical requirements with electrical characteristics and connection requirements. 7. Controls. 8. Wiring diagrams. 9. Accessories. C. Manufacturer's Installation Instructions: Submit assembly, support details, connection requirements, and include start-up instructions. D. Product Data: Submit catalog sheets indicating general assembly, dimensions, weights, materials, and certified performance ratings duct and service connections, electric nameplate data and wiring diagrams. E. Manufacturer's Certificate: Certify products meet or exceed specified requirements. 1.05 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Section 01 70 00 -Execution and Closeout Requirements: Closeout procedures. B. Project Record Documents: Record actual locations of units and controls installed remotely from units. C. Operation and Maintenance Data: Submit manufacturer's descriptive literature, operating instructions, maintenance and repair data, including instructions for lubrication, filter replacement, cleaning and spare parts lists. 1.06 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Cooling Capacity: Rate in accordance with ARI 340/360. B. Sound Rating: Measure in accordance with ARI 270. University of Connecticut HUMIDITY CONTROL EQUIPMENT 23 8400 -3 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 C. Performance Requirements: Conform to minimum EER as scheduled on the Drawings and as prescribed by ASHRAE 90.1 when tested in accordance with ARI 340/360. D. Unit and refrigeration system shall comply with ASHRAE 15. E. Unit and gas fired heating system shall comply with 2012 IFGC. F. Outside Air Damper Leakage: Test in accordance with AMCA 500. G. Maintain one copy of each document on site. H. Entire unit shall be ETL listed and/or CSA certified and shall comply with BOCA code M-401.1 and M-402.1. Units with listed components only shall not be acceptable. I. Coils shall be UL listed and/or CSA certified. J. Blower motor(s) and compressor(s) shall be UL listed and/or CSA certified. K. Pool Water heater(s) shall be UL listed and/or CSA certified and comply with BOCA Piping in accordance with BOCA code M-702.0 for joints and connections. All refrigerant pipes shall be copper type "L". L. Units shall be completely factory assembled, wired, piped and tested. All controls shall be factory adjusted and pre-set to the design conditions. Test report shall be available on request. Engineer reserves the right to witness factory performance testing. M. Manufacturer of the packaged system for natatorium environmental control shall have a minimum of 25 years experience in the production of these systems and have at least 5 similar or larger units in operation. N. The system shall have a limited warranty for twenty-five months from shipment. O. The entire cabinet shall be painted internally and externally. 1.07 QUALIFICATIONS A. Manufacturer: Company specializing in manufacturing products specified in this section with minimum ten years documented experience, and with service facilities within 100 miles of Project. B. Installer: Company specializing in performing Work of this section with minimum ten years documented experience as approved by manufacturer. 1.08 PRE-INSTALLATION MEETINGS A. Section 01 30 00 -Administrative Requirements: Pre-installation meeting. B. Convene minimum one week prior to commencing work of this section. 1.09 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Section 01 60 00 -Product Requirements: Product storage and handling requirements. B. Accept units on site in factory packing. Inspect for damage. C. Protect units from damage by storing off roof until roof mounting curbs are in place. 1.10 FIELD MEASUREMENTS A. Verify field measurements prior to fabrication. 1.11 COORDINATION A. Section 01 30 00 -Administrative Requirements: Requirements for coordination. B. Coordinate installation of roof curbs with roof structure, roof deck and roof membrane installation. University of Connecticut HUMIDITY CONTROL EQUIPMENT 23 8400 -4 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 1.12 WARRANTY A. Section 01 70 00 -Execution and Closeout Requirements: Product warranties and product bonds. B. Furnish five year manufacturer warranty for units. 1.13 MAINTENANCE SERVICE A. Section 01 70 00 -Execution and Closeout Requirements: Requirements for maintenance service. B. Furnish service and maintenance of equipment for one year from Date of Substantial Completion. C. Examine unit components bi-monthly. Clean, adjust, and lubricate equipment. D. Include systematic examination, adjustment, and lubrication of unit, and controls checkout and adjustments. Repair or replace parts in accordance with manufacturer's operating and maintenance data. Use parts produced by manufacturer of original equipment. E. Perform work without removing units from service during building normal occupied hours. F. Provide emergency call back service at all hours for this maintenance period. G. Maintain locally, near Place of the Work, adequate stock of parts for replacement or emergency purposes. Have personnel available to ensure fulfillment of this maintenance service, without unreasonable loss of time. H. Perform maintenance work using competent and qualified personnel under supervision of manufacturer or original installer. I. Do not assign or transfer maintenance service to agent or subcontractor without prior written consent of Owner. 1.14 EXTRA MATERIALS A. Section 01 70 00 -Execution and Closeout Requirements: Spare parts and maintenance products. B. Furnish one complete set of all types of filters for each unit. Extra set of filters shall be provided loose in manufacturers packaging to the Owner at Substantial Completion. Place extra set of filters in building at owner’s discretion. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 NATATORIUM DEHUMIDIFICATION UNIT A. Manufacturers: 1. Seresco. 2. Dectron. 3. PoolPak. 4. Desert Aire B. SCOPE 1. Packaged outdoor system for natatorium environment control including dehumidification, air heating/cooling, and an air cooled dry cooler. C. QUALITY AND SAFETY ASSURANCE 1. Unit shall be ETL listed. University of Connecticut HUMIDITY CONTROL EQUIPMENT 23 8400 -5 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 2. Units shall be completely factory assembled, wired, piped, and tested. All controls shall be factory adjusted and preset to the design conditions. Test report shall be available on request. 3. Units shall have a microprocessor controller with unit mounted refrigerant pressure transducers on each independent compressor circuit, air pressure transducers across filters and coils, temperature sensors and an Ethernet connection for monitoring and control via the internet. 4. The system shall have a 24 month limited parts warranty from ship date. D. GENERAL 1. The dehumidifier shall be a split system. Indoor unit shall include 2 scroll compressors, evaporator (dehumidifying coil), refrigerant liquid sub-cooling coils, condenser (air reheat coil), supply air blower, blower motors, motor starters, condenser water heat exchanger, condenser water pump, and controls in one complete enclosure, with a remote outdoor air-cooled dry cooler. 2. The system shall be configured with a Zero Reheat dehumidification mode and an air conditioning configuration to reject up to 100% excess compressor heat during the air conditioning season to the remote outdoor air-cooled dry cooler. 3. All controls shall be factory adjusted and preset to the design conditions. The unit shall have an Ethernet connection to the microprocessor and shall be accessible via the internet and monitored by building automation system utilizing BACNet MSTP. 4. The indoor unit shall be double walled construction. E. CABINET 1. The unit frame shall be constructed of heavy gauge galvanized steel with a formed galvanized structural steel base. Lifting lugs shall be welded on the base frame for rigging the unit. All exterior panels shall be 20 gauge galvanized G90 steel with a mill applied zinc phosphate primer followed by an exterior grade silicone modified polyester top coat. Panels shall be fastened to the frame with stainless steel hardware. Panels shall be isolated from the steel frame with dielectric gaskets to prevent galvanic corrosion. The floor of each section shall have a galvanized steel deck to isolate the entire unit from the building. All seams shall have exterior grade thermoplastic caulking inside and out to prevent air leakage. 2. Access doors shall be supported on continuous hinges and have multiple compression latches to provide quick access. Doors shall be provided for entrance to all sections housing components requiring routine maintenance. Full height access doors have stainless steel "hold back" latches to prevent door closure during the performance of service procedures. 3. All walls, roof, and doors in the air-handling compartment shall be double wall construction enclosing 2" thick fiberglass. Liners shall be painted 22 gauge galvanized galvanized G90 steel with a mill applied zinc phosphate primer followed by an exterior grade silicone modified polyester top coat to protect the insulation during routine service and maintenance operations. The floor of the air handling sections are insulated with 2" rigid foam, the floor insulation is protected from damage with a galvanized steel liner. University of Connecticut HUMIDITY CONTROL EQUIPMENT 23 8400 -6 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 4. Each unit shall have a built-in electrical control panel in a separate compartment in order not to disturb the airflow within the dehumidifier during electrical servicing. All electrical components shall be mounted on a 16 gauge sub panel. 5. The unit shall have built-in air filter racks with separate access door with compression fasteners. The filter rack shall be suitable to handle 2” 30-30 type disposable filters. 6. The unit shall be equipped with an opening suitable for admitting outdoor air to comply with ASHRAE Ventilation Standard 62.1. Outdoor air intake assembly shall have a built in air filter rack with separate access door and manual air balancing damper. 7. The unit shall have the 2 compressors, pool water heater, receivers, solenoid valves, refrigerant to water heat exchanger, condenser water pump, and the electrical panel in a separate vestibule compartment out of the processed air stream. All components shall be serviceable while the unit is in operation without disturbing the airflow. F. INSULATION 1. All exterior cabinet sections shall be insulated with two (2) inch thick fiberglass. Thermal conductivity shall be not more than 0.232 Btu/in h sq ft F° at 75 F° G. EVAPORATOR/DEHUMIDIFIER COILS 1. Evaporator/dehumidifier coils shall be designed for maximum moisture removal capacity 2. Coils shall be fully dipped and coated with a polyester/enamel coating for maximum corrosion protection. Coating shall comply with ASTM B117/D1654 and ASTM D2126 for corrosion resistance against common acids, salt and gases 3. Aluminum fin and copper tubes mechanically bonded to assure high heat transfer. 4. Shall have an integrated liquid refrigerant sub-cooling coil. 5. Each compressor circuit shall have an independent evaporator coil and incremental drain pan to allow for total independent operation. 6. Coil shall have 18-gauge galvanized casing and end plates. 7. Coil shall be factory tested at air pressures not less than 400 psig in a water bath. H. CONDENSER (AIR REHEAT COIL) 1. Coils shall be fully dipped and coated with a polyester/enamel coating for maximum corrosion protection. Coating shall comply with ASTM B117/D1654 and ASTM D2126 for corrosion resistance against common acids, salt and gases 2. Shall be sized for variable heat transfer into the air with a capacity of 100% of the compressors total required heat of rejection. Shall be manufactured with 3/8” OD seamless copper tubing mechanically expanded to assure high heat transfer with maximum twelve aluminum fins per inch. 3. Coil shall have 18-gauge galvanized casing and end plates. 4. Coil shall be factory tested at air pressures not less than 400 psig in a water bath. I. DRAIN PAN 1. Each compressor circuit shall have an independent evaporator coil and incremental drain pan to allow for total independent operation. All drain connections to be from the bottom of the unit. 2. Each evaporator coil shall be provided with a positive draining IAQ type double pitched coated aluminum drain pan. The drains for the main drain pan shall University of Connecticut HUMIDITY CONTROL EQUIPMENT 23 8400 -7 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 extend through bottom of the unit. A single "P" trap shall be provided to be field mounted external to the unit and freeze protected for proper operation of the unit. Drain pipe to be heat traced by installing Contractor. J. BLOWERS AND BLOWER MOTORS 1. Supply blowers: a. The complete blower assembly shall be statically and dynamically balanced on precision electronic balancers b. The blower assembly shall be mounted on a 1" deflection spring isolated rack c. The fan inlets shall be equipped with accidental contact protection screen d. Motor(s) shall be Premium efficiency painted cast iron construction TEFC, NEMA MG1.PART 31 Inverter Duty 15:1 Constant Torque Severe Duty with a service factor 1.25. Motors shall be 6 Pole 1200 RPM synchronous speed with HOA switch with motor safeties against overloading at 60 Hz operation directly on mains. Motors shall have double lipseals on both ends with re-greasable bearings 254T frame and larger with Polyurea grease K. Exhaust blowers: 1. The packaged exhaust blower (EF1) shall be sized to maintain the negative pressure requirement in the space during normal operation and its operation tied to the system's occupancy scheduler 2. The blower shall be impeller plenum fan complete with backward curved, three-dimensional, profiled blades made of high performance composite material. The blower shall be completely corrosion resistant and be maintenance free a direct drive via a direct current (DC) electronic commuted (EC) motor. The EC-Motor shall have zero slippage design and have continuously variable speed control when connected to the unit's controller. Fans that are not direct drive or EC are not acceptable. 3. The fan assembly shall be balanced in Class G 6.3 acc DIN ISO 1940, dynamic on two levels 4. The fan assembly shall be suitable for ambient temperatures of -40°C to max. +70°C 5. Thermal contacts installed in the windings compliant with THCL 155 6. Drive motor in external rotor principle, sealed in protection class IP54 with moisture protection impregnation of the windings, topical protection 7. High corrosion resistance design with high quality and reliability 8. The exhaust fan shall be controlled from an end switch on the power open of the exhaust air damper 9. Shall be packaged with the heat recovery module L. COMPRESSORS 1. The unit shall have 2 stages of control via 2 independent compressor circuits. 2. Two compressors shall be heavy duty suction-cooled, hermetic tandem set scroll type complete with forced feed lubrication, suction and discharge service valves, suction strainer, crankcase heater, and 3 phase solid state thermal motor protection. 3. The compressors shall be mounted on rubber in shear isolators to prevent transmission of any noise and vibration to the space below. University of Connecticut HUMIDITY CONTROL EQUIPMENT 23 8400 -8 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 4. Compressors shall be located outside the conditioned air stream in the service vestibule. M. REFRIGERATION CIRCUIT 1. The system shall consist of two factory sealed refrigeration circuits for dehumidification and sensible cooling. No site refrigeration work shall be required. 2. Each refrigeration circuit shall have pressure transducers monitoring the refrigerant discharge (high) and suction (low) pressures. The refrigeration circuit shall be accessible for diagnostics, adjustment and servicing without the need for service manifold gauges. 3. All refrigeration circuits shall have refrigerant control valves, a liquid line filter-drier, a liquid and moisture indicator, an expansion valve, head pressure control feature and pump down feature 4. All refrigeration circuits shall have an externally adjustable balanced port design mechanical thermostatic expansion valve 5. The system shall have an externally adjustable balanced port design mechanical thermostatic expansion valve. The valve shall have a removable power head 6. Tamper proof, hermetically sealed non-adjustable high and low pressure switches and refrigeration service valves shall be installed using Schrader type valves. Refrigeration service valves shall be located outside of the airstream 7. The suction line shall be fully insulated with 0.500-inch closed cell insulation 8. The maximum operating pressure for the glycol loop is 100 psi. The glycol loop temperature should not exceed 134 ºF. 9. The multiple independent refrigerant circuits shall be completely piped, tested, dehydrated and fully charged with oil and refrigerant. The refrigerant circuit components include compressor, condenser with integral liquid subcooling, liquid line service and charging valve, replaceable core filter drier in the liquid line, filter in the suction line, liquid line sight glass, relief valve, solenoid control valves, check valves, liquid and moisture indicator (out of process air stream), thermostatic expansion valves and pump down solenoid valves. 10. Receivers shall have two refrigerant level (maximum and minimum) indicating sight glasses. N. WATER HEATER(S) 1. The pool water heater shall be Titanium Gasketed Flat Plate heat exchanger. Heat exchanger that are not titanium are not acceptable. 2. Pool heaters that when breached allow water into the refrigeration system are not allowed. 3. Terminating connections are PVC NPT fittings located at the cabinet wall for easy connection. 4. The maximum circuit pressure rating is 100 psi. O. FILTERS 1. Wherever possible, air filters shall be standard sized, replaceable, off-the-shelf filters including: a. Exhaust Air: 2-Inch MERV 8, 30% pleated filters with rust-free non-metallic structure b. Return Air: 2-Inch MERV 13, 90% pleated filters with rust-free non-metallic structure on a slide-in or face-loading rack University of Connecticut HUMIDITY CONTROL EQUIPMENT 23 8400 -9 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 c. Outside Air: 2-Inch MERV 13, 90% pleated filters with rust-free non-metallic structure. d. Dirty air filter switches included on the return air filter for indicating an alarm when pressure drop exceeds a set point. P. HEAT RECOVERY COILS 1. The unit shall have heat recovery between the minimum exhaust and outdoor air streams. a. The heat recovery coils shall be sized for heat transfer between the two air streams. b. The heat recovery fluid circulating between coils shall be glycol. The module shall be a complete package and independent circuit that includes a circulating pump, fill valves and expansion tank 2. Coils shall be fully dipped and coated with a polyester/enamel coating for maximum corrosion protection. Coating shall comply with ASTM B117/D1654 and ASTM D2126 for corrosion resistance against common acids, salt and gases 3. Aluminum fin and copper tube joints mechanically bonded to assure high heat transfer Q. CONTROL PANEL 1. The electrical contractor shall be responsible for external power wiring and disconnect switch fusing. Power block terminals shall be provided 2. The system shall include a factory-installed fused disconnect 3. Main control panel shall be mounted inside the service vestibule outside of the process air stream 4. Blower motors shall be protected with thermal trip overloads 5. The system shall have a voltage monitor with phase protection 6. Available dry contacts shall include: a. Alarm b. Blower interlock c. Stage 1 & 2 heating d. Outdoor air damper control e. Remote exhaust fan #1 f. Remote exhaust fan #2 g. Outdoor-air cooled equipment h. System on i. Auxiliary pool heater 1 j. Heat recovery 7. Terminals shall be provided to send 24-volt power to the outdoor air cooled condenser or fluid cooler fan contactor 8. All wiring shall be installed in accordance with UL or CSA safety electrical code regulations and shall be in accordance with the NFPA All components used in the system shall be UL or CSA listed 9. Wiring diagrams shall be located near the electrical panel(s) on the system. These diagrams shall provide colour-coding and wire numbering for easy troubleshooting. All wires shall be contained in a wire duct. 10. The compressor(s) shall have a time delay on start to prevent short cycling University of Connecticut HUMIDITY CONTROL EQUIPMENT 23 8400 -10 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 11. An airflow switch and a dry contact for alarm(s) shall be provided and factory mounted. 12. Convenience outlet and light included factory mounted in control cabinet, powered and wired separately. R. MICROPROCESSOR CONTROL. 1. Unit shall be provided with a fully self-diagnostic minimum 512K of FLASH memory, 512K of battery backed up RAM, 8-bit and 22.1 Mhz microprocessor controller. All set points and adjustments shall be preprogrammed at the factory during full quality control and test operation. The microprocessor program shall be able to be field updated via FLASH memory. Program shall also be able to be updated via an internet connection. 2. The controller shall have as a minimum: 11 Analog inputs, 4 Analog outputs, 24 Digital inputs and 16 Digital outputs. 3. Controller shall have four (4) serial interface ports including one each of RS232 and RS485. The controller shall also 10 base-T Ethernet port with RJ-45 connector complete with link and activity LEDs. 4. Controller shall have a real time clock to time stamp unit operation log. Time clock shall have programmable 7-day occupied/unoccupied scheduling capabilities. 5. Control board shall include hardware watchdog supervisor to ensure failsafe operation. The control board shall operate at –40°C to +70°C. 6. Keypad and Display panel shall have a 122 by 32 pixel backlit graphic Liquid Crystal Display (LCD). There shall be 7 system status LEDs. The user shall be able to browse the screen using UP, DOWN, LEFT, RIGHT and ENTER keys. The panel shall have 3 soft keys that change functions based on where the user is in the software. 7. Shall be provided with a remote OPERATOR panel that is connected with an RJ-11 4 wire (telephone) cable. The remote OPERATOR panel shall be identical to unit mounted panel and allow the operator all the same features. 8. Unit shall have pressure transducers monitoring the refrigerant high and low pressures. The refrigeration circuit shall accessible for diagnostics, adjustment and servicing without the need of service manifold gauges. 9. The following status LEDs shall be on the controller. a. Dehumidification -Indicates that the system is dehumidifying the space. b. Cooling -Indicates that the air-conditioning mode is in operation. c. Space Heat -Indicates that the space heating is operating. d. Alarm – indicates there has been a failure requiring service. 10. The following setpoints shall be accessible and adjustable from either display panel: a. Space temperature b. Space relative humidity 11. The following sensors shall be unit mounted and monitored at either of the unit’s display panels: a. Refrigerant high pressure: Circuit 1-2 b. Refrigerant low pressure: Circuit 1-2 c. Return air temperature d. Supply air temperature e. Return air relative humidity University of Connecticut HUMIDITY CONTROL EQUIPMENT 23 8400 -11 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 f. Outdoor air temperature g. Evaporator leaving air temperature: Circuit 1-2 12. System Status – Shall indicate in a text message to the display what systems require attention or servicing. Built-in monitoring and diagnostics shall allow the user to view the following: a. Voltage – Phase Imbalance fault b. Dirty air filter c. Refrigerant high and low pressure d. Freezestat e. System off f. Blower off S. DAMPERS 1. Unit shall be provided with a power open and spring return outside air and exhaust air dampers. Dampers adjust between 0% to 100% open position. 2. Outdoor air and exhaust air dampers shall be opposed blade, power open and spring return. Damper blades shall be extruded Aluminum with dual thermal breaks and internally insulated with 3/4” polyurethane foam with neoprene double seal tips to minimize leakage. Damper leakage shall be less than 1% of maximum flow at 4-inch W.C. differential. Damper blades shall be mounted on steel rods which rotate on nylon bushings. All damper hardware shall be corrosion resistant. 3. Internal dampers shall be opposed blade and made from extruded anodized Aluminum with neoprene double seal tips to minimize leakage. Damper blades shall be mounted on steel rods which rotate on nylon bushings. All damper hardware shall be corrosion resistant. 4. Damper actuators shall have spring return fail safe close feature. T. AIR-COOLED AIR CONDITIONING 1. The system shall be equipped with an air conditioning mode where excess compressor heat is rejected to a remote outdoor air-cooled heat exchanger (aka Dry Cooler) via a single glycol fluid loop. No site refrigeration work shall be required. The system shall include a circulating pump and expansion tank. The packaged fluid cooled condenser and remote outdoor air-cooled heat exchanger shall both be capable of rejecting 100% of the compressor heat rejection with an air on temperature at summer design conditions 2. The system shall be provided with a dry contact rated for 24VAC/5A to operate the remote outdoor fluid cooler control 3. Each refrigeration circuit shall include refrigerant valves, a receiver with pressure relief valve set at 650 psig, a pressure 4. control valve and a pressure differential valve, and two manual shutoff valves to isolate the outdoor fluid cooler 5. Coils shall be tested at 425 PSIG and mounted vertically for complete surface utilization. Coils shall be counter flow and have adequate capacity to dissipate the total heat rejection of the system at design conditions. 6. Dry coolers shall have guards to protect the coils from vandalism and weather related damage. 7. Dry cooler fans shall be coated steel and have a steel hub locked on a stainless steel motor shaft with a keyway and square head set screws. Fans shall have a radius spun type venturi for efficient performance. Fans shall have vinyl coated University of Connecticut HUMIDITY CONTROL EQUIPMENT 23 8400 -12 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 external guards capable of being removed for service without removing the fan motor. 8. Fans shall be direct driven by NEMA constructed, three phase motors operating at 1140 RPM. Each motor shall have a shaft slinger to prevent water seepage into the motor. 9. System head pressure shall be maintained by internal pressure control and regulating valves. 10. Refrigeration circuit shall include solenoid refrigerant valves, receiver with pressure relief valve set at 400 psig, pressure control valve and pressure differential valve, and two manual shutoff valves to isolate the outdoor condenser. Each refrigerant circuit shall be provided with a receiver and 2 refrigerant level (max and min) viewing sight glasses to facilitate system charge verification. U. SEQUENCE OF OPERATION 1. The system shall be designed and sized to maintain the specified space conditions 2. System Startup a. Power is turned on or the system is restarted b. After a short initial delay to allow the sensors to stabilize, the blower starts and operates continuously c. Based on sensor feedback, the system shall begin or resume operation based on the sequence below 3. Airside Configuration a. The system continuously delivers the specified supply air volume to the natatorium b. The minimum exhaust air volume is set to meet the engineer's schedule. c. The minimum outdoor air volume is set to meet the engineer's schedule. 4. Dehumidification Mode a. The return air relative humidity is above the humidity setpoint b. Return air dewpoint is above dewpoint setpoint. c. The compressor enters the Compressor Start sequence d. If the system cannot maintain the relative humidity below setpoint, the second compressor circuit will start e. Compressor waste heat is rejected into a glycol fluid loop which feeds the reheat coils and the air conditioning air-cooled heat exchanger in parallel. f. The reheat coils are fully modulating (0-100%). The reheat output will modulate to maintain the space temperature at set point year-round. 5. Air Conditioning Mode a. The return air temperature is above the room temperature setpoint b. The compressor starts, if not already operating in Dehumidification Mode c. Excess compressor hot gas is diverted to a fluid-cooled heat exchanger. Up to 100% of compressor heat is rejected into the glycol fluid loop which is pumped outdoors to an outdoor air-cooled heat exchanger for 100% heat rejection at summer design ambient conditions d. 100% of compressor heat is rejected at the outdoor air-cooled heat exchanger on a summer design day. On off-peak days, the air reheat output will modulate to maintain the space temperature at the set point University of Connecticut HUMIDITY CONTROL EQUIPMENT 23 8400 -13 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 e. If the system cannot maintain the return air temperature setpoint, the second compressor will start 6. Space Heating Mode a. The return air temperature is below the room temperature setpoint b. The microprocessor space heating output signal is sent to the heating coil controller c. The microprocessor space heating output signal (0-10 volts) is sent to the heating coil controller. The signal output will regulate based on the return air temperature 7. Pool Water Heating Mode a. The return pool water temperature is below the pool water setpoint and the pool water flow switch or minimum temperature differential is satisfied. b. If the compressor is already operating due to a Dehumidification or Air Conditioning demand, the fluid control valve will divert fluid to the Titanium pool water heat exchanger to modulate the heating of the pool water. Pool water heating that does not use a titanium pool water heater or modulation to match the demands of the pool are not acceptable. c. If there is no pre-existing demand for the compressor to operate, the microprocessor sends a signal to the auxiliary pool water heater (remote by others) to operate. The compressor will not operate solely for a pool water heating demand unless specifically configured to do so at the controller. Aux Pool Heat contact will be closed with insufficient flow. In order to prevent the pool from overheating, it is recommended that a field-installed aquastat (provided by others) be installed in series with these wires. d. Factory-installed relay(s) and factory furnished, field-installed pool water temperature sensor(s) are provided to enable the smart pool feature. This feature provides the ability to activate booster pool water pump(s) feeding the unit when pool water heating is in demand. 8. Exhaust Air Heat Recovery Mode a. The minimum outdoor air damper and minimum exhaust fan(s) are tied to the system's occupancy schedule and will operate as programmed b. Once the outdoor air temperature falls below the heat recovery setpoint (65 °F by default; field-adjustable) the glycol pump shall circulate a glycol mixture between the exhaust air and the outdoor air heat recovery coils, recovering heat from the space condition exhaust air and using it to preheat the incoming outside air 9. Freeze Protection a. The supply air temperature falls below the freezestat setpoint b. Exhaust fan(s) are stopped and outdoor air damper(s) are fully closed c. When the freezestat alarm is tripped, it must be manually cleared by the operator V. FACTORY PERFORMANCE TESTING 1. The unit shall operate in all modes at the factory for a full performance and Quality Control inspection. A copy of the test report shall be available to the engineer upon request. 2. Microprocessor controls shall be factory adjusted and preset to the design conditions during testing. University of Connecticut HUMIDITY CONTROL EQUIPMENT 23 8400 -14 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 W. PRODUCT DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING 1. Handle unit carefully to prevent damage, breaking, denting and scoring. Damaged units or damaged components shall not be installed. Replace all damaged parts with new parts from the manufacturer. 2. If unit is to be stored prior to installation store in a clean, dry place. Protect from weather, dirt, fumes, water, construction, and physical damage. 3. Comply with manufacturer's rigging and installation instructions for unloading the unit and moving it to the final location. X. START UP 1. Factory start-up supervision and owner training shall be included. The installing Contractor’s technician shall also be present during this time period. Y. INSTALLATION 1. Execute the work in accordance with the specifications and in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and only by workmen experienced in this type of work. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 EXAMINATION A. Verify ductwork is ready for installation. B. Verify piping rough-ins are correct size and at correct location. C. Verify power wiring is correct voltage and at correct location. 3.02 PREPARATION A. Contact manufacturer to review installation procedures for field installed accessories. 3.03 INSTALLATION A. Install units on seismic/vibration isolation curbs. Refer to Section 23 05 48. B. Connect units to supply and return ductwork with flexible connections. Refer to Section 23 33 00. C. Install condensate piping with trap and route from drain pan to nearest roof drain. Refer to Section 23 21 13. D. Install components furnished loose for field mounting. E. Install electrical devices furnished loose for field mounting. F. Install control wiring between unit and field installed accessories. G. Remove from roof and dispose off-site panels removed from units during installation of economizer, dampers, etc. 3.04 MANUFACTURER’S FIELD SERVICES A. Section 01 40 00 -Quality Requirements: Requirements for manufacturer’s field services. B. Furnish services of factory trained representative for minimum of one day to start equipment according to manufacturer's instructions and in presence of manufacturer's representative. Test controls and demonstrate compliance with requirements. 3.05 CLEANING A. Section 01 70 00 -Execution and Closeout Requirements: Requirements for cleaning. University of Connecticut HUMIDITY CONTROL EQUIPMENT 23 8400 -15 Field House – Old Rec Center Renovation – Phase 2 Project #300209 B. Vacuum clean coils and inside of cabinets. C. Install temporary filters during construction period. Replace with permanent filters at Substantial Completion. Provide extra set of filters at Substantial Completion 3.06 DEMONSTRATION A. Section 01 70 00 -Execution and Closeout Requirements: Requirements for demonstration and training. B. Demonstrate operation and maintenance procedures. C. Furnish services of manufacturer's technical representative for 4 hours to instruct Owner's personnel in operation and maintenance of units. Schedule training with Owner, provide at least 7 days notice to Architect/Engineerof training date. END OF SECTION 