SECTION 230001 GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR HEATING, VENTILATING, AND AIR CONDITIONING WORK PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 WORK INCLUDED A. Work in this Section includes the providing of labor, materials, equipment and services necessary for a complete and safe installation in accordance with the contract documents and all applicable codes and authorities having jurisdiction for heating, ventilating and air conditioning work covered by all sections within the specifications (including but not limited to HVAC systems and equipment). B. As a condition of Contractor’s use of these specifications, Contractor agrees to: (i) name AKF as additional insured on Contractor’s insurance policies wherever permitted, including but not limited to Contractor’s General Liability policy, which shall be primary and non-contributory, (ii) provide AKF, upon request, with a certificate of insurance and copies of specific endorsements to Contractor’s insurance policies evidencing said additional insured status, and (iii) waive all rights of recovery against AKF by way of subrogation, assignment, or otherwise with regard to insured claims. C. Where variances occur between the drawings and specifications, or within either document itself, the item or arrangement of higher quality, or higher cost shall be included in the contact price. The Architect/Engineer will decide on the item and manner in which the work shall be installed. D. Where Divisions of Work 01 thru 14 are referenced herein and are not provided elsewhere in the project documents, refer to this section. 1. For Firestopping, refer to section 23 0300. 2. For Demonstration and Training refer to section 23 0400. E. Provide cutting and patching. F. Provide piping from plumbing terminations, 10 ft from equipment, for water, gas, compressed air and as indicated. G. Provide drainage from noted equipment to floor drains, roof, sink, or funnel drains. H. Provide piping connections to equipment, as required, for kitchens, laboratories, laundries, and as indicated. 1.02 COMMISIONING A. Commissioning for Energy Code compliance will be provided by the owner who will hire the commissioning agent. Provide all assistance and documents as required by the commissioning agent and special inspector including as required during functional testing. 1.03 SHORT CIRCUIT CURRENT RATING: A. All electrical equipment, starters and controller assemblies shall be provided with short circuit rating as follows: 1. Provide controllers with listed short circuit current rating not less than.100,000 AIC unless approved by the engineer based on submitted short circuit study. 2. Listed series ratings are acceptable, except where not permitted by motor contribution according to NFPA 70. 3. Label equipment utilizing series ratings as required by NFPA 70. 1.04 RELATED WORK AND REQUIREMENTS A. Requirements of general conditions, supplementary conditions for mechanical and electrical work and Division No. 1. B. Requirements noted under other Divisions of Work 1.05 WORK NOT INCLUDED: A. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230001 -1  General Provisions for Heating, Ventilating, and Air Conditioning Work  1. Providing temporary heat. 2. Providing finish painting including pipe stencilling. 3. Providing access doors and filler. 4. Installing access door and providing filler. 5. Providing access doors in concrete for access to fuel-oil tanks. 6. Providing trench covers and frames. 7. Providing chimney cleanout door and thimble. 8. Cutting and patching, except as noted in "AIA Document A201" and "Supplementary Conditions for Mechanical and Electrical Work." 9. Excavating and backfilling under building. 10. Excavating and backfilling. 11. Providing louvers in doors. 12. Providing undercut doors. 13. Providing wall louvers and screens. 14. Providing plenums other than sheet metal. 15. Providing flashing. 16. Providing shaft gratings. 17. Providing equipment platforms. 18. Providing pipe heat tracing system. 1.06 PREPURCHASED EQUIPMENT A. Assignment: 1. Equipment has been prepurchased by the owner for this project. The mechanical contractor, by bidding on this project, accepts assignment of the prepurchased equipment described herein which shall be received, installed and put into operation by this mechanical contractor. B. Coordination: 1. Mechanical contractor shall provide coordination between installation of prepurchased equipment and equipment that is not prepurchased and furnished by this contractor. Mechanical contractor to obtain all submittals from prepurchased equipment manufacturer and submit shop drawing as part of his work. C. Delivery: 1. Mechanical contractor shall accept delivery of prepurchased equipment at a designated location and in accordance with the delivery schedule as directed by owner’s representative. Bid shall indicate location of delivery. D. Installation: 1. Mechanical contractor shall provide all labor for and schedule the installation of pre.purchased equipment in a timely manner, as directed by the general contractor or owner’s representative. Bid shall indicate location of delivery. 2. Provide miscellaneous appurtenances as required to make prepurchased equipment a properly functioning part of the work of this trade. 3. Provide prepurchased equipment installation in accordance with manufacturer’s recommendation and the contract documents. 4. Provide all tools and materials as required to provide a complete installation of all prepurchased equipment. E. Up Front Purchase of Equipment: 1. The Contractor shall submit a list of long lead time items that will affect the schedule of the project if not purchased immediately up front at the start of the project. The Mechanical Contractor shall submit proposed manufacturer and lead times for all project equipment at time of project award. 1.07 DESCRIPTION OF BID DOCUMENTS A. Specifications, in general, describe quality and character of materials and equipment. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230001 -2  General Provisions for Heating, Ventilating, and Air Conditioning Work  B. Drawings, in general are diagrammatic and indicate sizes, locations, connections to equipment and methods of installation. Provide additional offsets, fittings, hangers, supports, valves, drains as required for construction and coordination with work of other trades. C. Scaled and indicated dimensions are approximate and are for estimating purposes only. Before proceeding with work, check and verify all dimensions. D. Make adjustments that may be necessary or requested in order to resolve space problems, preserve headroom, and avoid architectural openings, structural members and work of other trades. E. Typical details, where shown on the drawings, apply to each and every item of the project where such items are applicable. Typical details are not repeated in full on the plans, and are diagrammatic only, but with the intention that such details shall be incorporated in full. F. If any part of Specifications or Drawings appears unclear or contradictory, consult Architect and/or Engineer for interpretation and decision as early as possible during bidding period. Do not proceed with work without the Architect's and/or Engineer's decision. 1.08 DEFINITIONS A. "Furnish": To supply, deliver, unload, and inspect for damage. B. "Install": To unpack, assemble, erect, apply, place, finish, cure, protect, clean, start up, and make ready for use. C. "Provide": To furnish and install. D. "Supply": Same as Furnish. E. "Work": includes labor, materials, equipment, services, and all related accessories necessary for the proper and complete installation of complete systems. F. "Piping": includes pipe, tube, fittings, flanges, valves, controls, strainers, hangers, supports, unions, traps, drains, insulation, and all related accessories. G. "Wiring": includes raceway, fittings, wire, boxes, and all related accessories. H. "Concealed": not in view, installed in masonry or other construction, within furred spaces, double partitions, hung ceilings, trenches, crawl spaces, or enclosures. I. "Exposed": in view, not installed underground or "concealed" as defined above. J. "Indicated," "shown," or "noted": as indicated, shown or noted on drawings or specifications. K. "Similar" or "equal": of base bid manufacturer, equal in quality, materials, weight, size, performance, design and efficiency of specified product, conforming with "Base Bid Manufacturers." L. "Reviewed," "satisfactory," "accepted," or "directed": as reviewed, satisfactory, accepted, or directed by or to Architect and/or Engineer. M. "Motor Controllers": includes manual or magnetic starters with or without switches, individual pushbuttons or hand-off-automatic (HOA) switches controlling the operation of motors. N. "Control or Actuating Devices": includes automatic sensing and switching devices such as thermostats, pressure, float, flow, electro-pneumatic switches and electrodes controlling operation of equipment. O. "Finished Spaces": Spaces other than mechanical and electrical equipment rooms, furred spaces, pipe and duct shafts, unheated spaces immediately below roof, spaces above ceilings, unexcavated spaces, crawl spaces, and tunnels. P. "Exposed, Interior Installations": Exposed to view indoors. Examples include finished occupied spaces and mechanical equipment rooms. Q. "Exposed, Exterior Installations": Exposed to view outdoors, or subject to outdoor ambient temperatures and weather conditions. Examples include rooftop locations. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230001 -3  General Provisions for Heating, Ventilating, and Air Conditioning Work  R. "Concealed, Interior Installations": Concealed from view and protected from physical contact by building occupants. Examples include above ceilings and in duct shafts. S. "Concealed, Exterior Installations": Concealed from view and protected from weather conditions and physical contact by building occupants, but subject to outdoor ambient temperatures. Examples include installations within unheated shelters. 1.09 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. All equipment and accessories shall be the product of manufacturers regularly engaged in their manufacture. All items of a given type shall be the products of the same manufacturer. B. Furnish all equipment and accessories new and free from defects. C. All electrical equipment shall be listed by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. (UL) or bear UL labels. D. Supply all equipment and accessories in complete compliance with and in accordance with the applicable standards listed in reference standards of this Section and with all applicable national, state and local codes. 1.10 JOB CONDITIONS A. Inspection of Site Conditions: 1. Before starting work, visit the site and examine the conditions under which the work has to be performed. Report in writing any conditions which might adversely affect the work. B. Connections to existing work: 1. Install new work and connect to existing work with minimum interference to existing facilities. 2. Provide temporary shutdown of existing services at no additional charges and only with written consent of Owner. Schedule shutdowns not to interfere with normal operation of existing facilities. 3. Maintain continuous operation of existing facilities as required with necessary temporary connections between new and existing work. 4. Connect new work to existing work in neat and acceptable manner. Restore existing disturbed work to original condition. 5. Perform the following work only after regular working hours: a. All MEP systems shall remain operational for the duration of this project. All tie in work is required to be done after hours. Building staff to be notified in advance and provide method of procedure with scope and duration for each shutdown for review and acceptance by owner. C. Removal and relocation of existing work. 1. Disconnect, remove, or relocate HVAC material, equipment, and other work noted and required by alterations, modifications, or changes in existing construction. 2. Provide new material and equipment required for relocated equipment. 3. Plug or cap active piping or ductwork behind or below finish. 4. Dispose of removed HVAC equipment as directed. 5. Return removed HVAC equipment to Owner as directed. 1.11 REFERENCE STANDARDS A. Published specifications, standards tests, or recommended methods of trade, industry or governmental organizations apply to work in all Sections as noted below: 1. ASHRAE -American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air Conditioning engineers. 2. AABC -Associated Air Balance Controls. 3. AMCA -Air Moving and Conditioning Association. 4. ADC -Air Diffuser Council. 5. AWS -American Welding Society. 6. NEMA -National Electrical Manufacturers' Association. 7. ANSI -American National Standards Institute. 8. ASME -American Society of Mechanical Engineers. 9. ASTM -American Society for Testing and Materials. 10. NEC -National Electrical Code. 11. NFPA -National Fire Protection Association. 12. AHRI -Air-Conditioning, Heating and Refrigeration Institute. 13. UL -Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. 14. OSHA -Occupational Safety and Health Administration Regulations. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230001 -4  General Provisions for Heating, Ventilating, and Air Conditioning Work  1.12 SUBMITTALS A. Submit shop drawings product data, samples and certificates of compliance required by contract documents. B. Operating instructions, maintenance manuals and parts lists. 1. Provide manufacturer's equipment brochures and service manuals consisting of the following: a. Descriptive literature for equipment and components. b. Model number and performance data. c. Installation and operating instructions. d. Maintenance and repair instructions. e. Recommended spare parts lists. 2. Assemble manufacturers' equipment manuals in chronological order following the specifications' numbering system using heavy duty three ring binders. 3. Submit valve tag chart. 4. Submit field test reports including instrument set points and normal operating valves. 1.13 ELECTRONIC COPIES OF AKF DRAWINGS A. If the contractor requires (.dwg) format, after preparation the drawings will be forwarded only upon receipt of signed acceptance of terms form. Permission from the architect must first be obtained for AKF to include the architectural background as reference. The contractor is to obtain the architects latest drawings directly from the architect. B. These files are being issued for the convenience of the contractor and the contractor remains responsible for all contract requirements related to the normal shop drawing preparation process. 1.14 SUBMISSIONS: A. Provide all coordination drawings, ductwork and piping shop drawings in ‘AutoCad” format, version compatible with owner. All catalog cuts and submittals to be provided in electronic “PDF” format the architect will forward all submissions to the engineer. B. If paper submissions are to be provided the following shall be adhered to. 1. Submissions 11 in. X 17 in. or smaller: If the submission is a catalog cut, then the contractor shall submit one original and one copy. Otherwise, they shall submit two copies. The architect will forward the original and one copy (two copies when no original is received) to the engineer. All catalog cuts shall be complete. 2. Submissions larger than 11 in. X 17 in.: submit two copies to the architect. The architect will forward to the engineer. C. Indicate on each submission: project name and location, architect and engineer, item identification and approval stamp of prime contractor, subcontractor names and phone numbers, reference to the applicable design drawing or specification article, date and scale. D. The work described in all shop drawing submission shall be carefully checked for all clearances (including those required for maintenance and servicing), field conditions, maintenance of architectural conditions and proper coordination with all trades on the job. E. Each submitted shop drawing is to include a certification that all related job conditions have been checked and verified and that there are no conflicts. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230001 -5  General Provisions for Heating, Ventilating, and Air Conditioning Work  F. All shop drawings are to be submitted to allow ample time for checking in advance of field requirements. All submittals to be complete and contain all required and detailed information. Shop drawings with multiple parts shall be submitted as a package. G. If submittals differ from the contract document requirements, make specific mention of such difference in a letter of transmittal, with request for substitution, together with reasons for same. 1.15 AS-BUILTS AND EQUIPMENT OPERATION INSTRUCTIONS A. Provide all coordination drawings, ductwork and piping shop drawings in AutoCad format, version compatible with owner. All catalog cuts and submittals to be provided in electronic “PDF” format. The architect will forward all submissions to the engineer. B. On completion and acceptance of work, this contractor shall furnish written instructions, equipment manuals and demonstrate to the owner the proper operation and maintenance of all equipment and apparatus furnished under this contract. C. The contractor shall give one copy of the instructions to the owner and one copy to the engineer. . D. Final “as-built” drawings indicating as installed conditions shall be provided to the architect and engineer after completion of the installation. 1.16 OPERATING & MAINTENANCE INSTRUCTION A. Prepare operating and maintenance instructions manual including operating instructions, maintenance instructions, manufacturer's data, specific equipment data. B. Provide an alphabetical list of all system components, with the name, address, and 24-hour phone number of the company responsible for servicing each item during the first year of operation. C. Provide operating instructions for complete system, including: 1. Normal starting, operating, and shut-down 2. Emergency procedures for fire or failure of major equipment 3. Summer and winter special procedures 4. Day and night special procedures D. Provide maintenance instructions, including: 1. Valve tag list and equipment tag list 2. Proper lubricants and lubricating instructions for each piece of equipment, and date when lubricated 3. Required cleaning, replacement and/or adjustment schedule E. Provide manufacturer's data on each piece of equipment, including: 1. Installation instructions. 2. Drawings and specifications. 3. Parts list, including recommended items to be stocked. 4. Complete wiring and temperature control diagrams. 5. Marked or revised prints locating all concealed parts and all variations from the original system design. 6. Test and inspection certificates. F. Provide specific equipment data including, but not limited to, the following: 1. For Mechanical Systems: a. Boilers, heaters and associated equipment. b. Refrigeration equipment c. Heat rejection equipment d. Water treatment e. Motors, starters and VFD f. Heat exchangers g. Air Conditioning equipment h. Air Handling equipment i. Terminal units j. Fans k. Pumps. l. Valves and strainers. m. Piping and accessories. n. Ductwork and accessories o. Flow measuring devices. p. Electric wiring. q. Pressure tanks. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230001 -6  General Provisions for Heating, Ventilating, and Air Conditioning Work  2. For Automatic Control System: a. Drawings and description of system controlled. b. Sequence of operation for each system. c. Data on components. d. Wiring and piping, schematic any layout, for panels and panelboards. e. System operating manual, including set points. G. Provide instruction to operating personnel. 1. Instruct Owner's operating personnel in proper starting sequences, operation, shutdown, and maintenance procedures, including normal and emergency procedures. 2. Instruction to be by personnel skilled in operation of equipment. Instructions for major equipment to be by equipment manufacturers' representatives. 3. Make arrangements to give instructions by system and not by building areas. 4. Provide five (5) instruction sessions not to exceed six (6) hours each. 5. Instructions on automatic controls to be by manufacturer's representative. 1.17 CLEARANCE FROM ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT A. Piping and ductwork is prohibited in electric and telephone rooms and closets, elevator machine rooms, and for installations over or within 5 ft of transformers, substations, switchboards, motor control centers, standby power plants, and motors. B. Branch piping to equipment is acceptable when installed over or within 5 ft of motors. 1.18 STAIRWAYS A. Piping and equipment is prohibited in egress stairways. 1.19 DRIP PANS A. Provide drip pans under piping when installation over or within 5 ft of electrical apparatus is unavoidable or in rooms containing electrical equipment. Pan shall be reinforced, properly supported and made watertight. Provide enclosed type for pressure piping. Extend 1-1/4 in. drain pipe from pan to spill over nearest floor drain or as indicated. 1. Construction shall be 18 gauge galvanized sheet steel. 1.20 PRODUCT, DELIVERY, HANDLING AND STORAGE A. Ship materials and equipment in crated sections of sizes to permit passing through available space, where required B. Deliver equipment with protective crating and shrink-wrapped covering. C. Receive and accept materials and equipment at the site, properly handle, house, and protect them from damage and the weather until installation. Replace equipment damaged in the course of handling without additional charge. D. Store to prevent damage and protect from weather, dirt, fumes, water, and construction debris in clean dry space E. Arrange for and provide storage space or area at the job site for all materials and equipment to be received and/or installed in this project 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230001 -7  General Provisions for Heating, Ventilating, and Air Conditioning Work  F. All exposed openings of equipment, piping and ductwork are to be covered G. Handle according to manufacturer's written rigging and installation instructions for unloading, transporting, and setting in final location H. Protect units from physical damage. Leave factory shipping covers in place until installation 1.21 ACCESSIBILITY A. Install all work so that parts requiring periodic inspection, operation, maintenance, and repair are readily accessible. Minor deviations from the drawings may be made to accomplish this, but changes of substantial magnitude shall not be made without written approval. B. Group concealed valves, expansion joints, controls, dampers, and equipment requiring access, so as to be freely accessible through access doors. 1.22 SPECIAL TOOLS A. Provide one set of any special tools required to operate, adjust, dismantle or repair equipment furnished under this Division for the Owner's use at the completion of the work. B. Provide one pressure grease gun with adapters for each type of grease required. C. Provide one suitable tool case for special tools. 1.23 CUTTING AND PATCHING A. Provide all carpentry, cutting and patching required for proper installation of materials and equipment specified. Do not cut or drill structural members without review by Architect and Structural Engineer. 1.24 PROTECTION OF MATERIALS A. Protect from damage, water, dust, etc., materials, equipment and apparatus provided under this trade, both in storage and installed 1.25 SUBSTITUTIONS A. No substitute material or manufacturer of equipment shall be permitted without a formal written submittal to the engineer which includes all dimensional, performance and material specifications and is approved in writing by the engineer. Any changes in layout or design brought about by the use of a substitution shall be submitted to the engineer fully designed for review in conjunction with the submittal of the alternate. Any substitution must be submitted with an explanation why a substitution is being utilized. If the substitute is being utilized for financial reasons, the associated credit must be simultaneously submitted. Final acceptance or rejection of any substitution is subject to the owner's review. B. Contractor to be responsible for the additional cost relating to the substitution, including but not limited to space requirements, structural support, utilities including electrical power, gas, water, etc. 1.26 STANDARDS: A. If any item in the specification, as furnished by the contractor, is manufactured in a location which does not certify ASME/ANSI standards, the contractor is to pay the Owner for ALL expenses incurred by the Owner for an outside testing company to confirm such compliance. 1.27 COORDINATION A. Arrange for pipe spaces, duct spaces, space for equipment, chases, slots, and openings in building structure during progress of construction, to allow for mechanical installations. B. Coordinate installation of required supporting devices and set sleeves in poured-in-place concrete and other structural components as they are constructed. C. Coordinate requirements for access panels and doors for mechanical items requiring access that are concealed behind finished surfaces. D. Do not install piping, ductwork or other materials in locations that block access to items and equipment requiring access or removal including items of other trades. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230001 -8  General Provisions for Heating, Ventilating, and Air Conditioning Work  E. Provide coordination drawing for all areas of the work. The drawings shall have the following qualities: 1. Minimum 3/8” scale 2. Clearly show all the work for each trade including, but not limited to hangers, valves, dampers, actuators, access doors and service access requirements for all items. 3. Indicate bottom elevations of all ductwork, electrical conduit, raceways, cable trays, control wiring and piping. 4. Ductwork, piping, and conduit 3 inches and smaller may be shown in single line. 5. Ductwork, piping, and conduit greater than 3 inches shall be shown in double line. 6. Color scheme: a. Architectural and structural background: Light grey. b. Ductwork: Black. c. Equipment and pads: Purple. d. HVAC piping and equipment: Green. e. Electrical conduits and equipment: Blue. f. Plumbing: Orange. g. Fire protection: Red. h. Control wiring: Pink. 1.28 GUARANTEE A. The Contractor shall furnish a written guarantee to replace or repair promptly and assume responsibility for all expenses incurred for any workmanship and equipment in which defects develop within one year form the date of final certificate for payment and/or from date or actual use of equipment or occupancy of spaces by Owner included under the various parts of work, whichever date is earlier. This work shall be done as directed by the Owner. This guarantee shall also provide that where defects occur, the Contractor will assume responsibility for all expenses incurred in repairing and replacing work of other trades affected by defects, repairs or replacements in equipment supplied by the Contractor. 1.29 PERMITS AND FEES A. The Contractor shall give necessary notice, file drawings and specifications with the department having jurisdiction, obtain permits or licenses necessary to carry out this work and pay all fees therefore. The Contractor shall arrange for inspection and test of any or all parts of the work if so required by authorities and pay all charges for same. The Contractor shall pay all costs for, furnish to the Owner before final billing, all certificates necessary as evidence that the work installed conforms with all regulations where they apply to this work. B. This contractor shall prepare or hire the necessary consultants to prepare and file all plans, calculation, forms, etc.. required for filing with all agencies required for this work including but not limited to The DEP (Department of Environmental Protection ), DEC (Department of Environmental Conservation, Bureau of Air Resources, EPA Environmental protection Agency, FDNY, etc.. 1.30 SPECIAL / CONTROLLED INSPECTION -NYC A. Special inspection shall be provided by the owner. This contractor shall provide all required services to accomplish these inspections. 1.31 SERVICE AND WARRANTY (MAINTENANCE CONTRACT) A. This contract shall provide a full year service and warranty of all mechanical components and systems, with add alternate prices for years 2, 3 and 4 following this first year. At the time of acceptance of project, the tenant or owner’s representative will decide to accept which alternate, if any. 1.32 RIGGING A. This contractor shall provide all required rigging, hoisting and bracing to install the equipment as indicated on the plans. This work shall be performed by an insured certified licensed rigging company that is experienced in rigging equipment of the type indicated for the areas shown on the construction documents. This contractor shall submit rigging plans for approval prior to proceeding with the work. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230001 -9  General Provisions for Heating, Ventilating, and Air Conditioning Work  B. All permits required from the authorities and agencies involved to perform the rigging are the responsibilities of this contractor. C. All structural supports, modifications or additions are to be submitted to the structural engineer for approval prior to proceeding with the work. All supplemental structural supports, elevator charges /modifications, bracing and protection required for the rig is the responsibility of this contractor D. The rigging contractor shall hire and pay for all charges and services of the building elevator contractor for the rigging of the equipment 1.33 HOT (WET) TAPS: A. Provide new hot (wet) tap connections into piping systems as indicated on the plans. B. Provide all required equipment and materials such as a tapping machine, welding machine, full ported valve and a pressure containing fitting. Valve and pressure fitting to be rated for the working pressure of the piping system. C. Hot tap to be performed by a qualified contractor who is specialized in performing this type of work. Contractors name shall be submitted to the owner, owner’s representative, building management and engineer for approval prior to commencing work. D. Hot (wet) tap coupon is to be turned over to building management. 1.34 DRAIN DOWN FOR NEW PIPING CONNECTION INTO EXISTING: A. Contractor to obtain schedule and coordinate with building management for system drain down and connection into existing building piping. All costs associated with drain down are to be included as part of bid. 1.35 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Monitor quality control over suppliers, manufacturers, products, services, site conditions, and workmanship, to produce work of specified quality. B. Comply with manufacturers' instructions, including each step in sequence. C. Should manufacturers' instructions conflict with Contract Documents, request clarification from Architect before proceeding. D. Comply with specified standards as minimum quality for the work except where more stringent tolerances, codes, or specified requirements indicate higher standards or more precise workmanship. E. Have work performed by persons qualified to produce required and specified quality. F. Verify that field measurements are as indicated on shop drawings or as instructed by the manufacturer. G. Secure products in place with positive anchorage devices designed and sized to withstand stresses, vibration, physical distortion, and disfigurement. H. See individual specification sections for testing and inspection required. I. Replace Work or portions of the Work not complying with specified requirements. J. Contractor is responsible for knowing and complying with regulatory requirements, including but not limited to Federal, state and local requirements, pertaining to legal disposal of all construction and demolition waste materials. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 BASE BID MANUFACTURERS 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230001 -10  General Provisions for Heating, Ventilating, and Air Conditioning Work  A. Base bid on materials or equipment are specified by name of manufacturer, brand or trade name and catalog reference. B. The choice will be optional with bidder where two or more manufacturers are named. C. The following are base bid manufacturers for items under this Section: 1. Access doors: Karp Associates, Inc., Higgins Mfg. Co., Milcor Steel Co., and Walsh-Spencer Co. 2. Paint: Sherwin-Williams, Pittsburgh Plate Glass Co., Pratt and Lambert, and Rust-Oleum. 3. Gratings: Irving Grating IKG Industries and Ryerson -Inland Steel Co. 2.02 ACCESS DOORS A. This contractor shall submit to the architect for approval a plan indicating the size (minimum 24 in. x 24 in. where personnel access is required) and location of all access doors required for operation, maintenance and replacement of all concealed equipment, devices, valves, dampers and controls. Contractor shall arrange for furnishing and installation of all access doors in finished construction and include costs in the bid. B. Access doors shall be provided sufficiently large forreplacement of all equipment located in inaccessible walls and ceilings. Provide custom size, multileaf access panels, without cross bars, maximum 48 in. x 48 in. with piano hinge and safety chains. C. Access doors will be provided under General Construction Work. D. Supply access doors for all concealed HVAC items in inaccessible walls and ceilings for complete access, using a with a minimum door size of 18 in. x 18 in. for installation under the General Construction Work. Locating and setting shall be performed after review. E. Provide access doors for all concealed HVAC items in inaccessible walls and ceilings for complete access, using a minimum door size of 18 in. x 18 in. Locating and setting shall be performed after review. F. Flush type access doors shall be similar to Karp Type DSC-211 with No. 13 USSG steel doors and trim and No. 16 USSG steel frame, metal wings for keying into construction, concealed hinges and screwdriver operated stainless steel cam lock. Provide lift off type access doors, similar to Karp Type DSC-212, where door cannot swing open. G. In acoustic tile ceilings, factory finished white access doors shall be similar to Karp Type DSC.210, with No. 13 USSG steel frame, No. 16 USSG steel pan door suitable for receiving tile thickness and hinges that are not visible when door is closed. Access door shall have screwdriver operated stainless steel cam locks finishing flush with tile with a minimum of 2 per door. H. In plaster ceilings recessed access doors shall be similar to Karp DSC-210-PL, with recess to receive plaster. I. In fire rated construction provide fire rated access doors, similar to Karp KRP-150-FR, listed and labeled in accordance with applicable code requirements. J. Access doors shall have one coat of shop-painted zinc chromate primer. 2.03 ACCESS TILE IDENTIFICATION: A. In removable ceiling tiles, provide buttons, tabs, and markers to identify location of concealed work. Submit for review. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.01 MECHANICAL IDENTIFICATION A. Refer to identification Section 23 0553. 3.02 WATERPROOFING A. Waterproofing will be provided under General Construction Work. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230001 -11  General Provisions for Heating, Ventilating, and Air Conditioning Work  B. Where any work pierces waterproofing, installation shall be subject to review, provide all necessary sleeves, caulking, flashing and flashing fittings required to make openings absolutely watertight. C. Flashing: 1. Provide Copper: ASTM B370, cold rolled 16 oz/sq ft (24 gage) (0.0216 inch) (0.55 mm) thick; natural finish. 2. Provide Pre-Finished Aluminum: ASTM B209 (ASTM B209M)[<>]; 20 gage, (0.032 inch) (0.81 mm) thick; plain finish shop pre-coated with modified silicone coating. Pigmented Organic Coating System, AAMA 2603; baked enamel finish system. 3.03 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Perform tests as noted, and in the presence of Architect and/or Engineer and authorities having jurisdiction. B. Provide required labor, material, equipment, and connections necessary for tests and submit results for review. C. Repair or replace defective work and pay for restoring or replacing damaged work due to tests, as directed. 3.04 START-UP A. Properly lubricate all pieces of equipment. B. Check and clean all pipes and ducts of dirt and debris. C. Fill and vent all water systems. D. Check rotation on each motor. E. Prepare each piece of equipment in accordance with manufacturer's installation instructions and have a copy at the equipment. F. Have representatives of each manufacturer present when hereinafter specified, so that equipment will be started up by manufacturer. 3.05 CLEANING A. Brush and clean work prior to concealing, painting and acceptance. Perform in stages if directed. B. Clean and repair painted exposed work, soiled or damaged, to match adjoining work before final acceptance. C. Remove debris from inside and outside of material and equipment. 3.06 PROJECT CLOSEOUT PROCEDURES A. It shall be each contractor's responsibility to personally hand-deliver all of the required project closeout checklist items and to obtain Owner's authorized representative(s) signed receipt on all items requiring Owner sign-off. B. Review requirements of each section of the specifications and submit for approval to Architect the sign-off forms which shall become the project closeout checklist. These, at a minimum, shall include the following information shown in attached Project Closeout Checklist Example. The Architect and/or Owner may incorporate additional specific items to the following checklist which shall become part of the project requirements. C. Closeout Checklist Example:  DATES   ITEM  COMPLETED  RECEIVED BY OWNER  OWNER'S SIGNOFF  PERMITS  CITY AND COUNTY INSPECTION  58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230001 -12  General Provisions for Heating, Ventilating, and Air Conditioning Work  MANUFACTURER'S WARRANTIES  CONTRACTOR'S WARRANTIES  STATE FIRE RATING DATA  COPY OF FINAL SHOP DRAWINGS  LIST AND POSSESSION OF SPARE PARTS  PRESSURE TESTS  EQUIPMENT TESTS REQUIRED BY SPECS  O & M MANUALS  RECORD DOCUMENTS  COORDINATION DRAWINGS  SANITIZATION REPORTS  COMMISSIONING REPORTS/LETTERS/FORMS  ON-SITE TRAINING COMPLETE  PROTECTIVE DEVICE SETTINGS  VALVE TAGS AND CHARTS  FINAL ATC INSTALLATION DRAWINGS  INSURANCE UNDERWRITERS APPROVALS  FINAL PUNCH LIST (INITIALED BY CONTRACTOR THAT ITEMS ARE COMPLETE)  BUILDING CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY (C.O.)  24-HOUR PHONE NO. FOR SERVICE DURING GUARANTEE PERIOD  END OF SECTION 230001 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230001 -13  General Provisions for Heating, Ventilating, and Air Conditioning Work  SECTION 230005 PREPURCHASE SPECIFICATION GENERAL CONDITION -GENERAL 1.01 GENERAL CONDITIONS AND BID PROPOSAL SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS A. The manufacturer shall submit as part of Bid Proposal an item-by-item adherence to all requirements of these specifications, one-line diagrams, and any other data requested. Identify all proposed equipment with weights, dimensions, and access requirements. Lack of these requirements in the manufacturer’s technical proposal shall be considered as non-responsive bid and disqualify the bidder as this data is necessary for determination of installation and operational costs associated with the bid. 1. This specification describes the physical characteristics and operational requirements. It is not intended to arbitrarily eliminate consideration of alternative systems which may be standard with certain manufacturers. However, the proposed system must be in complete technical compliance with this specification. The manufacturer shall state what, if any, specific points of the proposed system construction and/or operation differ from the following described system. 2. The Owner reserves the right to reject any design at its own discretion. 3. The manufacturer shall notify the Owner and Engineer(Consultant) in writing regarding conflicting requirements, discrepancies or omissions in this specification. Upon written notification, the Owner and Engineer(Consultant), will resolve all such matters. 4. If the manufacturer takes exception to any portion of this specification, each exception shall be cross-referenced to its paragraph and page number. All exceptions shall be clearly explained in a section of the proposal defined as “Exceptions to the Specification”. If the vendor takes no exception to the specification, the proposal shall so state. 5. Off -loading, setting in place, installation, interconnecting equipment specified herein shall be the responsibility of the Owner’s Contractor (a separate contract and not included in the scope herein) including any and all associated labor, parts, tools and equipment. 6. It is the intent of this specification for the Owner to prepurchase the equipment and for it to be assigned to the installing contractor. 1.02 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS A. It is the intent of this specification to secure equipment that has been prototype tested, factory built, production tested, site tested, of the latest commercial design, together with all accessories necessary for a complete installation as described in the specifications herein. 1.03 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Bidder’s Representative: 1. Each bidder, by making their bid, represents that they have read and understand the bidding documents. 2. Bidding Procedures: a. All bids must be prepared and submitted on the forms provided by the Owner. b. A bid is invalid if it has not been deposited at the designated location prior to the time and date for the receipt of bids indicated or prior to any extension thereof issued to bidders. c. No bidder shall modify, withdraw, or cancel their bid or any part thereof for sixty (60) days after the time designated for the receipt of bids. d. Prior to the receipt of bids, bulletins will be mailed or delivered to each person or firm recorded by the Owner as having received the bidding documents and will be available for inspection wherever the bidding documents are kept available for that purpose. Bulletins issued after receipt of bids will be mailed or delivered only to the selected bidder. 3. Examination of Bidding Documents a. Any question raised during the bidding period relative to any apparent discrepancies or omissions in the specifications, interpretations of any provisions therein or their intent must be directed only to the Owner. b. Any and all such answers and interpretations and any other supplemental instructions will be issued to all bidders in the form of written bulletins or letters as the circumstances may require. c. In order that there may be adequate time for the Owner to properly issue answers and the bidders benefit therefrom, questions must be raised no later than three (3) working days before the bids are due. d. All bulletins and letters issued during the bidding period shall become part of the Contract Documents, and each bidder shall take their provisions fully into account in the preparation of their proposal. e. No oral changes to the specifications will be made during the bidding period, and no interpretation obtained in any manner other than as herein before described will be subsequently recognized. f. Attention is specifically called to the part of the Proposal Form where the bidder shall acknowledge receipt of all bulletins issued and the incorporation in their proposal of the effects thereof. 4. Rejection of Bids: a. The bidder acknowledges the right of the Owner to reject any and all bids and to waive any informality or irregularity in any bid received. In addition, the bidder recognizes the right of the Owner to reject a bid if the bidder fails to furnish any required bid security, or to submit the data required by the bidding documents, or if the bid is in any way incomplete or irregular. b. The bidder acknowledges the right of the Owner to reject any portion of the bid received and to award a partial contract based upon the completed proposal. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230005 -1  Prepurchase Specification General Condition  1.04 SUBMITTALS A. Shop Drawings: 1. The following drawings and information are to be submitted: a. Detailed specifications and descriptions of equipment to be furnished. b. Physical parameters of size, weight, piping requirements and performance. c. Requirements and extend of field assembly, if necessary. d. Details of items/services to be furnished under this contract and items/services to be furnished by local contractor. e. List of spare parts, where they are stocked, normal delivery time after ordering, and qualified local service organization. f. Delivery schedule (lead time) for all equipment. g. List all deviations from this specification. h. Provide full and part load performance characteristics for equipment. i. Sound performance characteristics. j. Name and phone number of the two (2) nearest service organizations who will have sufficient knowledge to service this equipment. 1) The following drawings and information (8 copies) are to be submitted for review after award of contract: (a) Detailed description of all equipment to be furnished, including elevations, dimensions of all equipment, shop drawings and installation drawings. (b) Sizes and weight of individual units to be handled in the field. (c) Complete interconnection, wiring diagrams and details between all components, with external connections identified. 2) The following drawings and information shall be submitted at the completion of work: (a) Five complete sets of operation and maintenance manuals. These manuals shall be applicable to all components of the equipment furnished as part of this specification. The manuals shall include piping diagrams, wiring diagrams, safety precautions, operating and maintenance instructions, installation drawings, list of special tools, and a complete list of numbered replacement parts. (b) Spare parts list. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230005 -2  Prepurchase Specification General Condition  2. Submission of Post-Bid Information: a. Upon request by the Owner, the selected bidder shall submit the following: 1) A statement of costs for each major item of work included in the bid. 2) A designation of work to be performed by the bidder. 3) A list of names of the selected supplier’s subcontractors or other persons or organizations. Selected supplier’s subcontractors and other persons and organizations proposed by the bidder and accepted by the Owner must be used on the work for which they were proposed and accepted and shall not be changed except with the written approval of the Owner. 3. Performance Bond and Labor and Material Payment Bond a. The Owner shall have the right, prior to the execution of the Contract, to require the bidder to furnish bonds covering the faithful performance of the Contract and the payment of all obligations arising thereunder in such form and amount as the Owner prescribes and with such sureties secured through the bidder’s usual sources as may, at their option, withdraw their bid without forfeiture of bid security. If the bidder submits an acceptable substitute with an increase in their bid price to cover the difference in cost occasioned by such substitution, the Owner may, at their discretion, accept the increased bid price or they may disqualify the bidder. Selected supplier’s subcontractors and other persons and organizations proposed by the bidder and accepted by the Owner must be used on the work for which they were proposed and accepted and shall not be changed except with the written approval of the Owner. b. The bidder shall require the attorney in fact, who executes the required bonds on behalf of the surety, to affix thereto a certified and current copy of their power of attorney, indicating the monetary limit of such power. 1.05 JOB CONDITIONS A. Time and Manner 1. The Owner requires that the work be completed as expeditiously as possible. 2. The time limit, which will be stated by the Owner will be the essence of the Contract, and the bidder’s proposal must be based upon meeting the delivery data therein stated without any additional compensation from the Owner. 3. The selected supplier shall, therefore, furnish all labor and materials in sufficient quantities, and in ample time, do all the expediting and scheduling of the work required and so manage the operation that the work will be completed within the time stated in the Contract plus any extension thereof approved by the Owner. B. TEST AND ACCEPTANCE 1. The operation of the equipment installation does not constitute an acceptance of the work by the Owner. The final acceptance is to be made after the equipment has been adjusted and has demonstrated that it fulfills the requirements of the plans and specifications and supplier has furnished all required documents in accordance with these specifications. A full field performance test including vibration, capacity, controls, etc., shall be performed by the Manufacturer’s Representative in the presence of the Engineer upon completion of the installation. Manufacturer shall submit with their bid a recommended test procedure to perform the above 2. Upon completion of the installation prior to acceptance, supervise thorough cleaning and adjustment of all apparatus furnished and/or installed under this specification. 3. Should it be found that the equipment, or any portions thereof, furnished under this section fails to comply with the specifications forming part thereof, with respect or regard to the quality, operation, application, quantity, rating, and performance of materials, appliances or labor used in the work, it shall be rejected and replaced. Cost of all work and changes necessitated in remedy of or replacement of said defects or imperfections shall be borned by the supplier. 4. After testing, manufacturer shall provide the Owner with the services of a qualified technician for training of the Owner’s personnel for a minimum of three (3) working days, two (2) days after the initial on-site tests and one (1) working day approximately six months later. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230005 -3  Prepurchase Specification General Condition  C. WARRANTY 1. Insurance: a. Before beginning any work at the site, the Supplier shall furnish certificates, in duplicate, showing coverage for insurance as required by the Owner. 2. Service Support: a. Should it become necessary for the presence of a factory-trained service technician to be on site, the Supplier shall provide one at no cost to the Owner within one week after request unless more expeditious response is identified in the respective technical specification any time during construction and before acceptance. 3. Warranty: a. The manufacturer shall guarantee all equipment and accessories, specified herein, against faulty and improper material and workmanship for a period of one (1) year from the date of final acceptance by the Owner. Provide an add-alternate breakout price for an additional one (1) year guarantee beyond the required warranty described above. b. The manufacturer shall promptly correct all deficiencies in this equipment which occur during the guarantee period, all to the satisfaction of the Owner, at no additional cost to the Owner, including all site labor, transportation and related expenses. c. If any unit fails to perform during the first thirty days after acceptance by the Owner, the period of warranty shall be extended to two (2) years after the date supplier remedies such failure. The period of warranty shall be similarly extended if that unit fails to perform during a thirty (30) day period after such remedy. The period of warranty shall be similarly extended until the work does not fail for a thirty (30) day period. 1.06 DELIVERY A. Delivery of all equipment shall be coordinated with the installing contractor, and scheduled through the Owner. Submit anticipated delivery schedule as part of bid submittal. END OF SECTION 230005 230005 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230005 -4  Prepurchase Specification General Condition  SECTION 230513 COMMON MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR HVAC EQUIPMENT PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. General construction and requirements. B. Applications. C. Single phase electric motors. D. Three phase electric motors. E. Electronically Commutated Motors (ECM). F. Bearing Protection Rings 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Section 260583 -Wiring Connections: Electrical characteristics and wiring connections. B. Section 230514 -Enclosed Controllers. C. Section 230515 -Variable Frequency Motor Controllers. 1.03 REFERENCE STANDARDS A. ABMA STD 9 -Load Ratings and Fatigue Life for Ball Bearings; 2015. B. ASHRAE Std 90.1 I-P-2019 -Energy Standard for Buildings Except Low-Rise Residential Buildings; 2019. C. ICC (IECC)-2018 -International Energy Conservation Code; 2018. D. IEEE 112 -IEEE Standard Test Procedure for Polyphase Induction Motors and Generators; 2004. E. NEMA MG 1 -Motors and Generators; 2018. F. NFPA 70 -National Electrical Code; Most Recent Edition Adopted by Authority Having Jurisdiction, Including All Applicable Amendments and Supplements. 1.04 SUBMITTALS A. See Section 013000 -Administrative Requirements for submittal procedures. B. Product Data: Provide wiring diagrams with electrical characteristics and connection requirements. C. Test Reports: Indicate test results verifying nominal efficiency and power factor for three phase motors larger than 1/2 horsepower. D. Manufacturer's Installation Instructions: Indicate setting, mechanical connections, lubrication, and wiring instructions. E. Operation Data: Include instructions for safe operating procedures. F. Maintenance Data: Include assembly drawings, bearing data including replacement sizes, and lubrication instructions. 1.05 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Manufacturer Qualifications: Company specializing in manufacture of electric motors for HVAC use, and their accessories, with minimum three years documented product development, testing, and manufacturing experience. B. Comply with NFPA 70. C. Products Requiring Electrical Connection: Listed and classified by Underwriters Laboratories Inc. as suitable for the purpose specified and indicated. 1.06 SHORT CIRCUIT CURRENT RATING: 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230513 -1  Common Motor Requirements for HVAC Equipment  A. All electrical equipment, starters and controller assemblies shall be provided with short circuit rating as follows: 1. Provide controllers with listed short circuit current rating not less than.100,000 AIC unless approved by the engineer based on submitted short circuit study. 2. Listed series ratings are acceptable, except where not permitted by motor contribution according to NFPA 70. 3. Label equipment utilizing series ratings as required by NFPA 70. 1.07 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Protect motors stored on site from weather and moisture by maintaining factory covers and suitable weather-proof covering. For extended outdoor storage, remove motors from equipment and store separately. 1.08 WARRANTY A. See Section 017800 -Closeout Submittals for additional warranty requirements. B. Provide five year manufacturer warranty for motors larger than 20 horsepower. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 MANUFACTURERS A. Baldor Electric Company/ABB Group; ______: www.baldor.com. B. Toshiba C. Teco-Westinghouse 2.02 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION AND REQUIREMENTS A. Electrical Service: 1. Motors 1/2 HP and Smaller: Volts indicated, single phase, 60 Hz. 2. Motors Larger than 1/2 Horsepower: Volts indicated, three phase, 60 Hz. B. Nominal full load efficiency for motors shall comply with ASHRAE 90.1 section 10.4.1 and IECC section C405.7 C. NEMA Design A and B general, special and definite purpose motors shall comply with NEMA Premium efficiency standards. D. Construction: 1. Open drip-proof type except where specifically noted otherwise. 2. Service factor: 1.15. 3. Design for continuous operation in 104 degrees F environment. 4. Design for temperature rise in accordance with NEMA MG 1 limits for insulation class, service factor, and motor enclosure type. 5. Motors with frame sizes 254T and larger: Energy efficient type. 6. Capacity and Torque Characteristics: Sufficient to start, accelerate, and operate connected loads at designated speeds, at installed altitude and environment, with indicated operating sequence, and without exceeding nameplate ratings or considering service factor E. Visible Nameplate: Indicating motor horsepower, voltage, phase, cycles, RPM, full load amps, locked rotor amps, frame size, manufacturer's name and model number, service factor, power factor, efficiency. F. Wiring Terminations: 1. Provide terminal lugs to match branch circuit conductor quantities, sizes, and materials indicated. Enclose terminal lugs in terminal box sized to NFPA 70, threaded for conduit. 2. For fractional horsepower motors where connection is made directly, provide threaded conduit connection in end frame. G. For use on AC power systems up to 600 V and installed at equipment manufacturer's factory or shipped separately by equipment manufacturer for field installation. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230513 -2  Common Motor Requirements for HVAC Equipment  H. The mechanical contractor is to provide motor, motor controllers and VFD’s. The mechanical contractor to install motor, motor controllers and VFD’s. The Electrical contractor is to wire all motors, motor controllers and VFD’s I. Coordination: 1. Coordinate features of motors, installed units, and accessory devices to be compatible with the following: a. Motor controllers b. Variable frequency motor controllers. c. Torque, speed, and horsepower requirements of the load. d. Ratings and characteristics of supply circuit and required control sequence. e. Ambient and environmental conditions of installation location. 2.03 APPLICATIONS A. Exception: Motors less than 250 watts, for intermittent service may be the equipment manufacturer's standard and need not comply with these specifications. B. Single phase motors for shaft mounted fans and centrifugal pumps: Split phase type. C. Single phase motors for fans, blowers, and pumps: Capacitor start, capacitor run type. D. Motors located in air handling units, exterior locations, wet air streams downstream of sprayed coil dehumidifiers, draw through cooling towers, air cooled condensers, humidifiers, direct drive axial fans, roll filters, explosion proof environments, dust collection systems, and air handling units: Totally enclosed type. 2.04 SINGLE PHASE POWER -SPLIT PHASE MOTORS A. Starting Torque: Less than 150 percent of full load torque. B. Starting Current: Up to seven times full load current. C. Breakdown Torque: Approximately 200 percent of full load torque. D. Drip-proof Enclosure: Class A (50 degrees C temperature rise) insulation, NEMA Service Factor, prelubricated sleeve or ball bearings. E. Enclosed Motors: Class A (50 degrees C temperature rise) insulation, 1.0 Service Factor, prelubricated ball bearings. F. Bearings: Prelubricated, antifriction ball bearings or sleeve bearings suitable for radial and thrust loading. G. Thermal Protection: Internal protection to automatically open power supply circuit to motor when winding temperature exceeds a safe value calibrated to temperature rating of motor insulation. Thermal-protection device shall automatically reset when motor temperature returns to normal range. 2.05 SINGLE PHASE POWER -CAPACITOR START MOTORS A. Starting Torque: Three times full load torque. B. Starting Current: Less than five times full load current. C. Pull-up Torque: Up to 350 percent of full load torque. D. Breakdown Torque: Approximately 250 percent of full load torque. E. Motors: Capacitor in series with starting winding; provide capacitor-start/capacitor-run motors with two capacitors in parallel with run capacitor remaining in circuit at operating speeds. F. Drip-proof Enclosure: Class A (50 degrees C temperature rise) insulation, NEMA Service Factor, prelubricated sleeve bearings. G. Enclosed Motors: Class A (50 degrees C temperature rise) insulation, 1.0 Service Factor, prelubricated ball bearings. H. Bearings: Prelubricated, antifriction ball bearings or sleeve bearings suitable for radial and thrust loading. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230513 -3  Common Motor Requirements for HVAC Equipment  I. Thermal Protection: Internal protection to automatically open power supply circuit to motor when winding temperature exceeds a safe value calibrated to temperature rating of motor insulation. Thermal-protection device shall automatically reset when motor temperature returns to normal range. 2.06 THREE PHASE POWER -SQUIRREL CAGE MOTORS A. Starting Torque: Between 1 and 1-1/2 times full load torque. B. Starting Current: Six times full load current. C. Power Output, Locked Rotor Torque, Breakdown or Pull Out Torque: NEMA Design B characteristics. D. Design, Construction, Testing, and Performance: Comply with NEMA MG 1 for Design B motors. E. Testing Procedure: In accordance with IEEE 112. Load test motors to determine free from electrical or mechanical defects in compliance with performance data. F. Motor Frames: NEMA Standard T-Frames of steel, aluminum, or cast iron with end brackets of cast iron or aluminum with steel inserts. G. Thermistor System (Motor Frame Sizes 254T and Larger): Three PTC thermistors embedded in motor windings and epoxy encapsulated solid state control relay for wiring into motor starter; refer to Section 262913. H. Bearings: Grease lubricated anti-friction ball bearings with housings equipped with plugged provision for relubrication, rated for minimum ABMA STD 9, L-10 life of 20,000 hours. Calculate bearing load with NEMA minimum V-belt pulley with belt center line at end of NEMA standard shaft extension. Stamp bearing sizes on nameplate. I. Sound Power Levels: To NEMA MG 1. J. Part Winding Start Where Indicated: Use part of winding to reduce locked rotor starting current to approximately 60 percent of full winding locked rotor current while providing approximately 50 percent of full winding locked rotor torque. K. Weatherproof Epoxy Sealed Motors: Epoxy seal windings using vacuum and pressure with rotor and starter surfaces protected with epoxy enamel; bearings double shielded with waterproof non-washing grease. L. Nominal Efficiency: As indicated at full load and rated voltage when tested in accordance with IEEE 112. M. Nominal Power Factor: As indicated at full load and rated voltage when tested in accordance with IEEE 112. 2.07 POLYPHASE MOTORS WITH ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS A. Motors Used with Variable Frequency Controllers: Ratings, characteristics, and features coordinated with and approved by controller manufacturer. 1. Windings: Copper magnet wire with moisture-resistant insulation varnish, designed and tested to resist transient spikes, high frequencies, and short time rise pulses produced by pulse-width modulated inverters. 2. Energy-and Premium-Efficient Motors: Class B temperature rise; Class F insulation. 3. Inverter-Duty Motors: Class F temperature rise; Class H insulation. 4. Thermal Protection: Comply with NEMA MG 1 requirements for thermally protected motors. B. Severe-Duty Motors: Comply with IEEE 841, with 1.15 minimum service factor. 2.08 ELECTRONICALLY COMMUTATED MOTORS (ECM) A. Manufacturers: 1. US Motors, a brand of NIDEC Motor Corporation; __________: www.usmotors.com. 2. Greenheck Vari-Green. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230513 -4  Common Motor Requirements for HVAC Equipment  B. Multispeed, constant torque, brushless DC motor for use in single phase AC power systems. C. Integral, programmable microprocessor controls capable of adjusting speed, torque and power withour efficiency loss. Controller to be PMW type, either manual or DDC controlled, capable of receiving a 0 to 10 volt DC signal. D. Harmonic Distortion: Provide integral or field assembled wide spectrum harmonic filter designed specifically for low DC bus capacitance to reduce harmonic distortion. Current Total Demand Distortion TDDi to be 5% or less in acordance with IEEE 519. 2.09 BEARING PROTECTION RING A. VFD induced shaft voltages may also discharge through the bearing in attached equipment included gear boxes, pillow block bearings, break motor bearings, encoders, etc. Applying AEGIS SGR Bearing Protection Ring applied to the motor shaft will discharge induced electrical voltages to ground and prevent voltages from seeking a discharge path through the attached equipment. B. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 1. Provide shaft grounding ring (AEGIA SGR on the AC motor to discharge shaft currents to the ground whenever variable frequency PWM drives are installed to control AC motors. 2. Bearing ring to be circumferential conductive micro-fiber and maintenance free 3. Provide vibration baseline readings before and after installation 4. Installation to be preformed by factory authorized personnel only. 5. For outdoor installations, a cover should be installed to prevent rust on the shaft. Use Ted Pella fast drying silver paint on motor shaft to help retard rust. 6. For wash down duty application, high pressure water should not be directed onto the conductive micro fibers. Install o-ring or slinger to AEGIS SGR. 7. For severe duty environments, install an o-ring or slinger against the AEGIS SGR to prevent ingress of excess grease or particles. 8. Verify RPM/ surface rates with AEGIS engineering. 9. Maximum temperature rating 300F/150C – Verify application specific temperatures with AEGIS engineering. 10. Minimum temperature rating -40 degrees F/C – Verify application specific temperatures with AEGIS engineering. 11. Humidity rating -0-90% -Verify application specific acceptable humidity with AEGIS engineering 12. Shaft preparation -Motor shaft must be clean and bear metal to ensure electrical contact of motor shaft to conductive micro fibers. 13. Shaft -Shaft motor manufacturer standard shaft finish is suitable for AEGIS shaft grounding ring application. A nominal 130 micron finish or better. 14. Corrosion Protection -Apply a Fast Drying Silver paint such as Ted Pella #16040-30, on shaft surface to prevent corrosion. 15. Thread Locking Compound -Do not use Loctite or any other non-conductive material to secure the screws. 16. Excessive Vibration -Installation bolts should be tightened and lock washers used. In some critical applications it may also be desirable to use a thread locker. In this case you must use a conductive silver epoxy such as Chemtronics Conductive Silver Epoxy CW2400. 2.10 INDUCTIVE ABSORBERS A. For all motors over 100 HP and controlled by a VFD, in addidtion to providing bearing protection rings, provide inductive absorbers. B. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 1. Provide inductive abosrbers on the leads between the VFD and the motor. The inductive absorbers shall be by Cool Blue and NaLA line absorbers 2. Inductive absorbers shall have inner cores constructed of nanocrystalline tape, processed to a permeability no less than 30,000 3. External core construction should be Zytel FR70G25 VO NNC10 with RAL 5012 Blue Pigment 4. Inductive absorbers shall have a Currie temp of 600 C and an RTI temp of 120 C. 5. Install CoolBlur Inductive absorbers on the leads between the VFD and the motor, as close to the VFD as possible, per manufacturer's guidelines. a. Common Mode Cores: All motor leads must pass through the center of all cores. No grounding wires should be through the cores, and all shielding must be pulled back to allow installation of the cores over unshielded cable. b. NaLA line absorbers: Install over each individual motor cable, after CoolBlue Inductive Absorbers, as close as possible. Each cable should have the correct amount of NaLA per cable, as shown in the manufacturer's application guide. No grounding wires should be through the cores, and all shielding must be pulled back to allow installation of the cores over thge unshielded cable. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230513 -5  Common Motor Requirements for HVAC Equipment  PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 INSTALLATION A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Install securely on firm foundation. Mount ball bearing motors with shaft in any position. C. Check line voltage and phase and ensure agreement with nameplate. END OF SECTION 230513 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230513 -6  Common Motor Requirements for HVAC Equipment  SECTION 230514 ENCLOSED CONTROLLERS PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Enclosed NEMA controllers for low-voltage (600 V and less) applications: 1. Magnetic motor starters. 2. General purpose contactors. 3. Manual motor starters. 4. Motor-starting switches without overload protection. B. Overcurrent protective devices for motor controllers, including overload relays. C. Control accessories: 1. Auxiliary contacts. 2. Pilot devices. 3. Control and timing relays. 4. Control power transformers. 5. Control terminal blocks. 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Section 230513 -Common Motor Requirements for HVAC Equipment. B. Section 230515 -Variable-Frequency Motor Controllers. 1.03 REFERENCE STANDARDS A. IEEE C57.13 -IEEE Standard Requirements for Instrument Transformers; 2016. B. NECA 1 -Standard for Good Workmanship in Electrical Construction; 2015. C. NEMA 250 -Enclosures for Electrical Equipment (1000 Volts Maximum); 2014. D. NEMA ICS 2 -Industrial Control and Systems Controllers, Contactors and Overload Relays Rated 600 Volts; 2000 (R2005), with errata, 2008. E. NEMA ICS 5 -Industrial Control and Systems: Control Circuit and Pilot Devices; 2000 (R2010). F. NEMA ICS 6 -Industrial Control and Systems: Enclosures; 1993 (R2011). G. NEMA BS 31047 -Heavy Duty Enclosed and Dead-Front Switches (600 Volts Maximum); 2013 (Reaffirmed 2023). H. NETA ATS -Acceptance Testing Specifications for Electrical Power Equipment and Systems; 2013. I. NFPA 70 -National Electrical Code; Most Recent Edition Adopted by Authority Having Jurisdiction, Including All Applicable Amendments and Supplements. J. UL 98 -Enclosed and Dead-Front Switches; Current Edition, Including All Revisions. K. UL 489 -Molded-Case Circuit Breakers, Molded-Case Switches and Circuit Breaker Enclosures; Current Edition, Including All Revisions. L. UL 60947-1 -Low-Voltage Switchgear and Controlgear -Part 1: General Rules; Current Edition, Including All Revisions. M. UL 60947-4-1 -Low-Voltage Switchgear and Controlgear -Part 4-1: Contactors and Motor-starters -Electromechanical Contactors and Motor-starters; Current Edition, Including All Revisions. 1.04 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS A. The mechanical contractor is to furnish motor, motor controllers and VFD’s. The mechanical contractor to install motor, motor controllers and VFD’s. The Electrical contractor is to wire all motors, motor controllers and VFD's. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230514 -1  Enclosed Controllers  B. The mechanical contractor shall be responsible for coordinating all requirements of the motor and controller manufacturer. C. If this contractor elects to substitute or increase motor horsepower over that specified, the cost of motor, motor controllers and electrical changes shall be borne by this contractor D. Each motor except as noted, shall be provided with a combination disconnection means and across-the-line magnetic starter with push button stations mounted on cover or variable frequency drive. Coordinate requirements between trades (electrical and mechanical contractors. E. For automatically or remotely controlled motors, furnish hand off auto (HOA ) selector switches in place of the push buttons. F. Provide manually operated motor starters of the proper size for all motors less than 1/2 hp which are not automatically controlled. Starters for motors 175 watts or less shall consist of a snap switch with thermal overload protection where such protection is not an integral part of the motor. G. Combination magnetic starters for all motors shall have thermal overload, pilot light, low voltage protection in all three phases. Include a control transformer for each magnetic starter to provide 120 volt control power with 3 sets of spare normally closed or normally open contacts H. Starters for motors 75 hp and above shall be solid state electronic soft start type starters. I. Disconnect switches are to be provided by the electrical contractor if not integral with equipment. J. Provide enclosures for motor controllers suitable for operating environment. K. Coordination: 1. Coordinate the work with other trades to avoid placement of ductwork, piping, equipment, or other potential obstructions within the dedicated equipment spaces and working clearances required by NFPA 70. 2. Coordinate the work to provide motor controllers and associated overload relays suitable for use with the actual motors to be installed. 3. Coordinate the work to provide controllers and associated wiring suitable for interface with control devices to be installed. 4. Coordinate arrangement of electrical equipment with the dimensions and clearance requirements of the actual equipment to be installed. 5. Verify with manufacturer that conductor terminations are suitable for use with the conductors to be installed. 6. Notify Architect of any conflicts with or deviations from the contract documents. Obtain direction before proceeding with work. 1.05 SUBMITTALS A. See Section 013000 -Administrative Requirements, for submittal procedures. B. Product Data: Provide manufacturer's standard catalog pages and data sheets for motor controllers, enclosures, overcurrent protective devices, and other installed components and accessories. 1. Include characteristic trip curves for each type and rating of overcurrent protective device. C. Shop Drawings: Indicate dimensions, voltage, controller sizes, short circuit current ratings, conduit entry locations, conductor terminal information, and installed features and accessories. 1. Include dimensioned plan and elevation views of enclosed controllers and adjacent equipment with all required clearances indicated. 2. Include wiring diagrams showing all factory and field connections. 3. Clearly indicate whether proposed short circuit current ratings are fully rated or, where acceptable, series rated systems. 4. Include documentation of listed series ratings. 5. Include documentation demonstrating selective coordination. 6. Include short circuit study to support AIC ratings. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230514 -2  Enclosed Controllers  D. Manufacturer's Installation Instructions: Indicate application conditions and limitations of use stipulated by product testing agency. Include instructions for storage, handling, protection, examination, preparation, and installation of product. E. Field Quality Control Test Reports. F. Project Record Documents: Record actual installed locations of controllers and final equipment settings. 1. Include nameplate data of actual installed motors and associated overload relay selections and settings.Demostrate that selection of heaters suit actual motor nameplate full-load currents. For adjustable overload relays, demostrate that dip switch settings for motor running overload protection suit actual motor to be protected. 2. Motor Circuit Protectors: Include magnetic instantaneous trip settings. G. Maintenance Data: Include information on replacement parts and recommended maintenance procedures and intervals. H. Maintenance Materials: Furnish the following for Owner's use in maintenance of project. 1. See Section 016000 -Product Requirements, for additional provisions. 2. Electronic Trip Circuit Breakers: Provide one portable test set. 3. Indicating Lights: Two of each different type. 1.06 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Conform to requirements of NFPA 70. B. Maintain at the project site a copy of each referenced document that prescribes execution requirements. C. Manufacturer Qualifications: Company specializing in manufacturing the products specified in this section with minimum three years documented experience. D. Product Listing Organization Qualifications: An organization recognized by OSHA as a Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory (NRTL) and acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction. 1.07 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Store in a clean, dry space. Maintain factory wrapping or provide an additional heavy canvas or heavy plastic cover to protect units from dirt, water, construction debris, and traffic. B. Handle carefully in accordance with manufacturer's written instructions to avoid damage to internal components, enclosure, and finish. 1.08 FIELD CONDITIONS A. Maintain field conditions within required service conditions during and after installation. B. Interruption of Existing Electrical Service: Do not interrupt electrical service to facilities occupied by Owner or others unless permitted under the following conditions and then only after arranging to provide temporary electrical service according to requirements indicated: 1. Notify Construction Manager no fewer than twodays in advance of proposed interruption of electrical service. 2. Do not proceed with interruption of electrical service without Construction Manager's written permission. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 MANUFACTURERS A. Eaton Corporation: www.eaton.com. B. General Electric Company: www.geindustrial.com. C. Rockwell Automation, Inc; Allen-Bradley Products: ab.rockwellautomation.com. D. Schneider Electric; Square D Products: www.schneider-electric.us. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230514 -3  Enclosed Controllers  E. Siemens Industry, Inc: www.usa.siemens.com. F. ABB Power Distributio, Inc; ABB Control, Inc. Subsidiary G. Danfoss Inc.l Danfoss Electronic Drives Div. H. Source Limitations: Furnish enclosed motor controllers and associated components produced by a single manufacturer and obtained from a single supplier. 1. Motor-starting switches without overload protection may be produced by the same manufacturer as the wiring devices used for this project. 2.02 SHORT CIRCUIT CURRENT RATING: 2.03 ENCLOSED CONTROLLERS A. Provide enclosed controller assemblies consisting of all required components, control power transformers, instrumentation and control wiring, accessories, etc. as necessary for a complete operating system. B. Provide products listed, classified, and labeled as suitable for the purpose intended. C. All electrical equipment, starters and controller assemblies shall be provided with short circuit rating of 100,000 AIC unless indicated otherwise. D. Description: Enclosed controllers complying with NEMA ICS 2, and listed and labeled as complying with UL 60947-1 and UL 60947-4-1; ratings, configurations and features as indicated on the drawings. 1. Provide controllers with listed short circuit current rating not less than.100,000 AIC unless approved by the engineer based on submitted short circuit study. E. Service Conditions: 1. Listed series ratings are {CH#105802}. 2. Provide controllers and associated components suitable for operation under the following service conditions without derating: a. Altitude: 3. Label equipment utilizing series ratings as required by NFPA 70. 1) Class 1 Km Equipment (devices utilizing power semiconductors, e.g. variable frequency controllers): Less than 3,300 feet. 2) Class 2 Km Equipment (electromagnetic and manual devices): Less than 6,600 feet. b. Ambient Temperature: Between 32 degrees F and 104 degrees F. 4. Provide controllers and associated components suitable for operation at indicated ratings under the service conditions at the installed location. F. Short Circuit Current Rating: 1. All electrical equipment, starters and controller assemblies shall be provided with short circuit rating as follows: a. Provide controllers with listed short circuit current rating not less than.100,000 AIC unless approved by the engineer based on submitted short circuit study. b. Listed series ratings are acceptable, except where not permitted by motor contribution according to NFPA 70. c. Label equipment utilizing series ratings as required by NFPA 70. G. Selectivity: Where the requirement for selectivity is indicated, furnish products as required to achieve selective coordination. H. Conductor Terminations: Suitable for use with the conductors to be installed. I. Enclosures: 1. Comply with NEMA ICS 6. 2. Environment Type per NEMA 250: Unless otherwise indicated, as specified for the following installation locations: a. Indoor Clean, Dry Locations: Type 1 or Type 12. b. Outdoor Locations: Type 3R or Type 4. c. Other Wet or Damp Indoor locations: Type 4 3. Finish: Manufacturer's standard unless otherwise indicated. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230514 -4  Enclosed Controllers  J. Instrument Transformers: 1. Comply with IEEE C57.13. 2. Select suitable ratio, burden, and accuracy as required for connected devices. 3. Current Transformers: Connect secondaries to shorting terminal blocks. 4. Potential Transformers: Include primary and secondary fuses with disconnecting means. K. Magnetic Motor Starters: Combination type unless otherwise indicated. 1. Combination Magnetic Motor Starters: NEMA ICS 2, Class A combination motor controllers with magnetic contactor(s), externally operable disconnect and overload relay(s). 2. Configuration: Full-voltage non-reversing unless otherwise indicated. 3. Use of non-standard starter sizes smaller than specified standard NEMA sizes is not permitted. 4. Disconnects: Circuit breaker type. a. Circuit Breakers: Motor circuit protectors (magnetic-only) unless otherwise indicated or required. b. Provide externally operable handle with means for locking in the OFF position. Provide safety interlock to prevent opening the cover with the disconnect in the ON position with capability of overriding interlock for testing purposes. c. Provide auxiliary interlock for disconnection of external control power sources where applicable. 5. Overload Relays: Bimetallic thermal type unless otherwise indicated. 6. Pilot Devices Required: a. Furnish local pilot devices for each unit as specified below unless otherwise indicated on drawings. b. Single-Speed, Non-Reversing Starters: 1) Pushbuttons: START-STOP. 2) Selector Switches: HAND/OFF/AUTO. 3) Indicating Lights: Red ON, Green OFF. L. General Purpose Contactors: Combination type unless otherwise indicated. 1. Combination Contactors: NEMA ICS 2, Class A combination controllers with magnetic contactor(s) and externally operable disconnect, but without integral overload relay(s). 2. Configuration: Full-voltage non-reversing unless otherwise indicated. 3. Disconnects: Circuit breaker type. a. Circuit Breakers: Thermal magnetic unless otherwise indicated or required. b. Provide externally operable handle with means for locking in the OFF position. Provide safety interlock to prevent opening the cover with the disconnect in the ON position with capability of overriding interlock for testing purposes. c. Provide auxiliary interlock for disconnection of external control power sources where applicable. 4. Pilot Devices Required: a. Furnish local pilot devices for each unit as specified below unless otherwise indicated on drawings. b. Contactors for motor applications where overload protection is provided separately or where motor contains integral thermal protectors to be provided with pilot devices as specified for magnetic motor starters above. M. Manual Motor Starters: 1. Description: NEMA ICS 2, Class A manually-operated motor controllers with overload relay(s). 2. Configuration: Non-reversing unless otherwise indicated. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230514 -5  Enclosed Controllers  N. Motor-Starting Switches: Horsepower-rated switches without overload protection; toggle operator. 2.04 OVERCURRENT PROTECTIVE DEVICES A. Overload Relays: 1. Provide overload relays and, where applicable, associated current elements/heaters, selected according to actual installed motor nameplate data, in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations and NFPA 70; include consideration for motor service factor and ambient temperature correction, where applicable. 2. Inverse-Time Trip Class Rating: Class 20 unless otherwise indicated or required. 3. Trip-free operation. 4. Visible trip indication. 5. Resettable. a. Employ manual reset unless otherwise indicated. b. Do not employ automatic reset with two-wire control. 6. Bimetallic Thermal Overload Relays: a. Interchangeable current elements/heaters. b. Adjustable trip; plus/minus 10 percent of nominal, minimum. c. Trip test function. 7. Melting Alloy Thermal Overload Relays: a. Interchangeable current elements/heaters. 8. Solid-State Overload Relays: a. Adjustable full load current. b. Phase loss protection. c. Phase imbalance protection. d. Ambient temperature insensitive. e. Thermal memory. f. Trip test function. g. Provide isolated alarm contact. B. Fusible Disconnect Switches: 1. Description: Quick-make, quick-break, dead-front fusible switch units complying with NEMA BS 31047, and listed and labeled as complying with UL 98; ratings, configurations, and features as indicated on the drawings. 2. Fuse Clips: As required to accept indicated fuses. 3. Provide externally operable handle with means for locking in the OFF position. Provide means for locking switch cover in the closed position. Provide safety interlock to prevent opening the cover with the switch in the ON position with capability of overriding interlock for testing purposes. C. Circuit Breakers: 1. Interrupting Capacity (not applicable to motor circuit protectors): a. Provide circuit breakers with interrupting capacity as required to provide the short circuit current rating indicated, but not less than specified minimum requirements. b. Fully Rated Systems: Provide circuit breakers with interrupting capacity not less than the short circuit current rating indicated. c. Series Rated Systems: Provide circuit breakers listed in combination with upstream devices to provide interrupting rating not less than the short circuit current rating indicated. 2. Motor Circuit Protectors: a. Description: Instantaneous-trip circuit breakers furnished with magnetic instantaneous tripping elements for short circuit protection, but not with thermal inverse time tripping elements for overload protection; UL 489 recognized only for use as part of a listed combination motor controller with overload protection; ratings, configurations, and features as indicated on the drawings. b. Provide field-adjustable magnetic instantaneous trip setting. c. Provide the following features and accessories where indicated or where required to complete installation: 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230514 -6  Enclosed Controllers  1) Shunt Trip: Provide coil voltage as required for connection to indicated trip actuator. 2) Pad-Lock Provision: For locking circuit breaker handle in OFF position. 3) Auxiliary Switch: SPDT switch suitable for connection to system indicated for indicating when circuit breaker has tripped or been turned off. 4) Undervoltage Release: For tripping circuit breaker upon predetermined drop in coil voltage with field-adjustable time delay to prevent nuisance tripping. 5) Alarm Switch: SPDT switch suitable for connection to system indicated for indicating when circuit breaker has tripped. 2.05 CONTROL ACCESSORIES A. Auxiliary Contacts: 1. Comply with NEMA ICS 5. 2. Provide number and type of contacts indicated or required to perform necessary functions, including holding (seal-in) circuit and interlocking, plus one normally open (NO) and one normally closed (NC) spare contact for each magnetic motor starter, minimum. B. Pilot Devices: 1. Comply with NEMA ICS 5; heavy-duty type. 2. Pushbuttons: Unless otherwise indicated, provide momentary, non-illuminated type with flush button operator; normally open or normally closed as indicated or as required. 3. Selector Switches: Unless otherwise indicated, provide maintained, non-illuminated type with knob operator; number of switch positions as indicated or as required. 4. Indicating Lights: Push-to-test type unless otherwise indicated. 5. Provide LED lamp source for indicating lights and illuminated devices. C. Control and Timing Relays: 1. Comply with NEMA ICS 5. 2. Provide number and type of relays indicated or required to perform necessary functions. D. Control Power Transformers: 1. Size to accommodate burden of contactor coil(s) and all connected auxiliary devices, plus ____ VA spare capacity. 2. Include primary and secondary fuses. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 EXAMINATION A. Verify that field measurements are as indicated. B. Verify that ratings of enclosed controllers are consistent with the indicated requirements. C. Verify that mounting surfaces are ready to receive enclosed controllers. D. Verify that conditions are satisfactory for installation prior to starting work. 3.02 INSTALLATION A. Install products in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Install controllers in accordance with NECA 1 (general workmanship). C. Arrange equipment to provide minimum clearances in accordance with manufacturer's instructions and NFPA 70. D. Provide required support and attachment components in accordance with Section 260529. E. Install enclosed controllers plumb and level. F. Provide grounding and bonding in accordance with Section 260526. G. Install all field-installed devices, components, and accessories. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230514 -7  Enclosed Controllers  H. Provide fuses complying with Section 262813 for fusible switches as indicated. I. Where accessories are not self-powered, provide control power source as indicated or as required to complete installation. J. Set field-adjustable controllers and associated components according to installed motor requirements, in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations and NFPA 70. K. Set field-adjustable circuit breaker tripping function settings as determined by overcurrent protective device coordination study performed in accordance with Section 260573. 3.03 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. See Section 014000 -Quality Requirements, for additional requirements. B. Inspect and test in accordance with NETA ATS, except Section 4. C. Motor Starters: Perform inspections and tests listed in NETA ATS, Section 7.16.1.1. Tests listed as optional are not required. D. Fusible Switches: Perform inspections and tests listed in NETA ATS, Section 7.5.1.1. E. Molded Case Circuit Breakers: Perform inspections and tests listed in NETA ATS, Section 7.6.1.1 for circuit breakers larger than ____ amperes. Tests listed as optional are not required. F. Correct deficiencies and replace damaged or defective enclosed controllers or associated components. 3.04 ADJUSTING A. Adjust tightness of mechanical and electrical connections to manufacturer's recommended torque settings. 3.05 CLEANING A. Clean dirt and debris from controller enclosures and components according to manufacturer's instructions. B. Repair scratched or marred exterior surfaces to match original factory finish. 3.06 CLOSEOUT ACTIVITIES A. Demonstration: Demonstrate proper operation of controllers to Owner, and correct deficiencies or make adjustments as directed. B. Training: Train Owner's personnel on operation, adjustment, and maintenance of enclosed controllers and associated devices. 1. Use operation and maintenance manual as training reference, supplemented with additional training materials as required. 2. Instructor: Manufacturer's authorized representative. 3. Location: At project site. 3.07 PROTECTION A. Protect installed enclosed controllers from subsequent construction operations. END OF SECTION 230514 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230514 -8  Enclosed Controllers  SECTION 230515 VARIABLE-FREQUENCY MOTOR CONTROLLERS PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Variable frequency controllers. 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Section 230513 -Common Motor Requirements for HVAC Equipment. 1.03 REFERENCE STANDARDS A. NEMA ICS 7.1 -Safety Standards for Construction and Guide for Selection, Installation, and Operation of Adjustable-Speed Drive Systems; 2014. B. NEMA ICS 7 -Industrial Control and Systems: Adjustable-Speed Drives; 2014. C. NEMA 250 -Enclosures for Electrical Equipment (1000 Volts Maximum); 2014. D. NETA ATS -Acceptance Testing Specifications for Electrical Power Equipment and Systems; 2013. E. NFPA 70 -National Electrical Code; Most Recent Edition Adopted by Authority Having Jurisdiction, Including All Applicable Amendments and Supplements. 1.04 SUBMITTALS A. See Section 013000 -Administrative Requirements, for submittal procedures. B. Product Data: Provide catalog sheets showing voltage, controller size, ratings and size of switching and overcurrent protective devices, short circuit ratings, dimensions, and enclosure details. 1. Include short circuit study to support AIA ratings. C. Shop Drawings: Indicate front and side views of enclosures with overall dimensions and weights shown; conduit entrance locations and requirements; and nameplate legends. D. Test Reports: Indicate field test and inspection procedures and test results. E. Compliance to IEEE 519 1. Harmonic analysis for particular jobsite including total harmonic voltage distortion and total harmonic current distortion (TDD). a. The VFD manufacturer shall provide calculations, specific to this installation, showing total harmonics voltage distortion is less than 5%. Input line filters shall be sized and provided as required by the VFD manufacturer to ensure compliance with IEEE standard 519. All VFD’s shall include a minimum of 5% impedance reactors, no exceptions. b. No VFD shall be reviewed unless all required calculations are submitted and reviewed as part of the shop drawing submission. F. Manufacturer's Instructions: Indicate application conditions and limitations of use stipulated by testing agency. Include instructions for storage, handling, protection, examination, preparation, and installation of product. G. Manufacturer's Field Reports: Indicate start-up inspection findings. H. Operation Data: NEMA ICS 7.1. Include instructions for starting and operating controllers, and describe operating limits that may result in hazardous or unsafe conditions. I. Maintenance Data: NEMA ICS 7.1. Include routine preventive maintenance schedule. J. Maintenance Materials: Furnish the following for Owner's use in maintenance of project. 1. See Section 016000 -Product Requirements, for additional provisions. 2. Extra Air Filters: Two of each type. 1.05 WORK INCLUDED 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230515 -1  Variable-Frequency Motor Controllers  A. The mechanical contractor is to furnish motor and variable frequency controllers (VFD’s). The mechanical contractor to install motor and VFD’s. The Electrical contractor is to wire all motors and VFD’s B. The mechanical contractor shall be responsible for coordinating all requirements of the motor and VFD manufacturer. C. If this contractor elects to substitute or increase motor horsepower over that specified, the cost of motor, motor controllers and electrical changes shall be borne by this contractor D. Each motor except as noted, shall be provided with a combination disconnecting means and across-the-line magnetic starter with push button stations mounted on cover or variable frequency drive. Coordinate requirements between trades (electrical and mechanical contractors. E. For automatically or remotely controlled motors, furnish hand off auto (HOA ) selector switches in place of the push buttons. F. Combination magnetic starters for all motors shall have thermal overload, pilot light, low voltage protection in all three phases. Include a control transformer for each magnetic starter to provide 120 volt control power with 3 sets of spare normally closed or normally open contacts G. Starters for motors 75 hp and above shall be solid state electronic soft start type starters. H. Disconnect switches are to be provided by the electrical contractor if not integral with equipment. I. Provide enclosures for VFD’s suitable for operating environment. J. Spare Part: Provide recommended spare parts list and shelf service life. Provide break out line items. 1.06 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Conform to requirements of NFPA 70. B. Manufacturer Qualifications: Company specializing in manufacturing the products specified in this section with minimum three years documented experience and with service facilities within 100 miles of Project. C. Products: Listed, classified, and labeled as suitable for the purpose intended. D. Product Listing Organization Qualifications: An organization recognized by OSHA as a Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory (NRTL) and acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction. 1.07 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Store in a clean, dry space. Maintain factory wrapping or provide an additional heavy canvas or heavy plastic cover to protect units from dirt, water, construction debris, and traffic. B. Handle in accordance with manufacturer's written instructions. Lift only with lugs provided for the purpose. Handle carefully to avoid damage to components, enclosure, and finish. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 MANUFACTURERS A. ABB Power Distribution, Inc.; ABB Control, Inc. Subsidiary B. Toshiba International Corporation C. Yaskawa. 2.02 DESCRIPTION A. Variable Frequency Controllers: Enclosed controllers suitable for operating the indicated loads, in conformance with requirements of NEMA ICS 7. Select unspecified features and options in accordance with NEMA ICS 3.1. 1. Employ microprocessor-based inverter logic isolated from power circuits. 2. Employ pulse-width-modulated inverter system. 3. Design for ability to operate controller with motor disconnected from output. 4. Design to attempt five automatic restarts following fault condition before locking out and requiring manual restart. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230515 -2  Variable-Frequency Motor Controllers  B. Twelve (12) Pulse Input Configuration, 25HP to 200HP: The VFD shall be configured with a 12.pulse converter section comprised of two full wave bridge rectifiers, and an integral three.phase-shifting transformers to reduce the harmonic current distortion. The VFD, phase-shifting transformer, and bypass contactors shall be provided in one enclosure. Each 12-pulse VFD shall be furnished with a 3% line reactor and 2.5% D.C. choke to avoid line interference and act as harmonic filters C. Enclosures, Indoor installation: NEMA 250, Type 1, venitlated suitable for equipment application in places accessible only to qualified personnel. D. Enclosures, Exterior/Wet environment installation: NEMA 250, Type 4X, in places accessible only to qualified personnel. E. Short Circuit Current Rating: 1. All electrical equipment, starters and controller assemblies shall be provided with short circuit rating as follows: a. Provide controllers with listed short circuit current rating not less than.100,000 AIC unless approved by the engineer based on submitted short circuit study. b. Listed series ratings are acceptable, except where not permitted by motor contribution according to NFPA 70. c. Label equipment utilizing series ratings as required by NFPA 70. F. Finish: Manufacturer's standard enamel. 2.03 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS A. Displacement Power Factor: Between 1.0 and 0.96, lagging, over entire range of operating speed and load. B. Operating Ambient: 0 degrees C to 40 degrees C. C. Minimum Efficiency at Full Load: 96% percent. D. Volts Per Hertz Adjustment: Plus or minus 10 percent. E. Current Limit Adjustment: 60 to 110 percent of rated. F. Acceleration Rate Adjustment: 0.5 to 30 seconds. G. Deceleration Rate Adjustment: 1 to 30 seconds. H. Input Electrical Signal: 4 to 20 mA DC. I. Overload Capability: 1.1 times the base load current for 60 seconds; 2.0 times the base load current for 3 seconds J. Minimum Speed: 5 to 25 percent of maximum rpm. K. Maximum Speed: 80 to 100 percent of maximum rpm. L. Input transient protection by means of surge suppressors. M. Under-and overvoltage trips; inverter overtemperature, overload, and overcurrent trips. N. Motor Overload Relay: Adjustable and capable of NEMA ICS 2, Class 30 performance. O. Notch filter to prevent operation of the controller-motor-load combination at a natural frequency of the combination. P. Instantaneous line-to-line and line-to-ground overcurrent trips. Q. Loss-of-phase protection. R. Reverse-phase protection. S. Short-circuit protection. T. Motor overtemperature fault. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230515 -3  Variable-Frequency Motor Controllers  2.04 CONTROL SIGNAL INTERFACE: A. Electric Input Signal Interface: A minimum of 2 analog inputs (0 to 10 V or 0/4-20 mA) and 6 programmable digital inputs. B. Remote Signal Inputs: Capability to accept any of the following speed-setting input signals from the BMS or other control systems: 1. 0 to 10-V dc. 2. 0-20 or 4-20 mA. 3. Potentiometer using up/down digital inputs. 4. RS485. 5. Keypad display for local hand operation. 2.05 COMMUNICATIONS A. Provide an RS485 interface allowing VFD to be used with an external system within a multidrop LAN configuration. Interface shall allow all parameter settings of VFD to be programmed via BMS control. Provide capability for VFD to retain these settings within the nonvolatile memory. B. Coordinate building BMS vendor (Schnider) 2.06 COMPONENTS A. Display: Provide integral digital display to indicate output voltage, output frequency, and output current. B. Status Indicators: Separate indicators for overcurrent, overvoltage, ground fault, overtemperature, and input power ON. C. Furnish HAND-OFF-AUTOMATIC selector switch and manual speed control. D. Include under voltage release. E. Control Power Source: Separate circuit. F. Door Interlocks: Furnish mechanical means to prevent opening of equipment with power connected, or to disconnect power if door is opened; include means for defeating interlock by qualified persons. G. Safety Interlocks: Furnish terminals for remote contact to inhibit starting under both manual and automatic mode. H. Control Interlocks: Furnish terminals for remote contact to allow starting in automatic mode. I. Manual Bypass: Furnish contactor, motor running overload protection, and short circuit protection for full voltage, non-reversing operation of the motor. Include isolation switch to allow maintenance of inverter during bypass operation. J. Solid-State, Reduced-Voltage Controller: NEMA ICS 2, suitable for use with NEMA MG 1, Design B, polyphase, medium induction motors for motors 75 horsepower and greater K. Emergency Stop: Use dynamic brakes for emergency stop function. L. Disconnecting Means: Include integral fused disconnect switch on the line side of each controller. M. Provide five eight adjustable set points to lock out operation at frequencies that may provide mechanical resonance. N. Wiring Terminations: Match conductor materials and sizes indicated. 2.07 ACCESSORIES A. Push-Button Stations, Pilot Lights, and Selector Switches: NEMA ICS 2, heavy-duty type. B. Stop and Lockout Push-Button Station: Momentary-break, push-button station with a factory-applied hasp arranged so padlock can be used to lock push button in depressed position with control circuit open. C. Control Relays: Auxiliary and adjustable time-delay relays. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230515 -4  Variable-Frequency Motor Controllers  D. Standard Displays: 1. Output frequency (Hz). 2. Set-point frequency (Hz). 3. Motor current (amperes). 4. DC-link voltage (VDC). 5. Motor torque (percent). 6. Motor speed (rpm). 7. Motor output voltage (V). 2.08 SOURCE QUALITY CONTROL A. Shop inspect and perform standard productions tests for each controller. B. Make completed controller available for inspection at manufacturer's factory prior to packaging for shipment. Notify Owner at least 7 days before inspection is allowed. C. Allow witnessing of factory inspections and tests at manufacturer's test facility. Notify Owner at least 7 days before inspections and tests are scheduled. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 EXAMINATION A. Verify that surface is suitable for controller installation. B. Do not install controller until building environment can be maintained within the service conditions required by the manufacturer. C. Verify that field measurements are as indicated on shop drawings. 3.02 INSTALLATION A. Install in accordance with NEMA ICS 7.1 and manufacturer's instructions. B. Tighten accessible connections and mechanical fasteners after placing controller. C. Provide fuses in fusible switches; refer to Section 262813 for product requirements. D. Select and install overload heater elements in motor controllers to match installed motor characteristics. 3.03 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Provide the service of the manufacturer's field representative to prepare and start controllers. 1. Service station shall be located within 100 miles of job site and shall be available upon a 24 hour basis. B. Perform field inspection and testing in accordance with Section 014000. C. Setup drive set points to lock out operation at frequencies that may provide mechanical resonance. D. Inspect and test in accordance with NETA ATS, except Section 4. E. Perform inspections and tests listed in NETA ATS, Section 7.17. F. Provide 4 hour start up / operation training at the time of installtion. 3.04 ADJUSTING A. Make final adjustments to installed controller to assure proper operation of load system. Obtain performance requirements from installer of driven loads. 3.05 CLOSEOUT ACTIVITIES A. Demonstrate operation of controllers in automatic and manual modes. 3.06 MAINTENANCE A. See Section 017000 -Execution Requirements, for additional requirements relating to maintenance service. B. Provide a separate maintenance contract for specified maintenance service. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230515 -5  Variable-Frequency Motor Controllers  C. Provide service and maintenance of controllers for one year from Date of Substantial Completion. END OF SECTION 230515 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230515 -6  Variable-Frequency Motor Controllers  SECTION 230548 VIBRATION AND SEISMIC CONTROLS FOR HVAC VIBRATION AND SEISMIC CONTROLS FOR HVAC PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Vibration isolation requirements. B. Seismic control requirements. 1. Includes requirements for seismic qualification of equipment not specified in this section. C. Vibration-isolated equipment support bases. D. Vibration isolators. E. External seismic snubber assemblies. F. Seismic restraint systems. G. Vibration-isolated and/or seismically engineered roof curbs. 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Section 014533 -Code-Required Special Inspections and Procedures. B. Section 033000 -Cast-in-Place Concrete. C. Section 055000 -Metal Fabrications: Materials and requirements for fabricated metal supports. D. Section 210548 -Vibration and Seismic Controls for Fire Suppression Piping and Equipment. E. Section 220548 -Vibration and Seismic Controls for Plumbing Piping and Equipment. F. Section 230001 -General Provisions for Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning G. Section 230529 -Hangers and Supports for HVAC Piping and Equipment. 1.03 DEFINITIONS A. HVAC Component: Where referenced in this section in regards to seismic controls, applies to any portion of the HVAC system subject to seismic evaluation in accordance with applicable codes, including distributed systems (e.g., ductwork, piping). B. Seismic Restraint: Structural members or assemblies of members or manufactured elements specifically designed and applied for transmitting seismic forces between components and the seismic force-resisting system of the structure. C. OSPHD: California Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development. Department of Health Care Access and Information (HCAI). 1.04 REFERENCE STANDARDS A. The applicable versions of reference standards shall be the latest version as adopted and amended by the AHJ. B. ASCE 7 -Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures; 2010, with 2013 Supplements and Errata. C. ASCE 19 -Structural Applications of Steel Cables for Buildings; 2016. D. ASHRAE (HVACA) -ASHRAE Handbook -HVAC Applications; 2015. E. FEMA 412 -Installing Seismic Restraints for Mechanical Equipment; 2002. F. FEMA 413 -Installing Seismic Restraints for Electrical Equipment; 2004. G. FEMA 414 -Installing Seismic Restraints for Duct and Pipe; 2004. H. FEMA E-74 -Reducing the Risks of Nonstructural Earthquake Damage; 2011. I. ICC (IBC) -International Building Code; 2015. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -1  Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC  J. ICC-ES AC156 -Acceptance Criteria for Seismic Certification by Shake-Table Testing of Nonstructural Components; 2010, with Editorial Revision (2015). K. MFMA-4 -Metal Framing Standards Publication; 2004. L. IAS AC172 -Accreditation Criteria for Fabricator Inspection Programs for Structural Steel; International Accreditation Service, Inc.; 2017. M. SMACNA (SRM) -Seismic Restraint Manual Guidelines for Mechanical Systems; Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors' National Association; 2008. 1.05 ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS A. Coordination: 1. Coordinate selection and arrangement of vibration isolation and/or seismic control components with the actual equipment to be installed. 2. Coordinate the work with other trades to provide additional framing and materials required for installation. 3. Coordinate compatibility of support and attachment components with mounting surfaces at the installed locations. 4. Seismic Controls: a. Coordinate the arrangement of seismic restraints with piping, conduit, equipment, and other potential conflicts installed under other sections or by others. b. Coordinate the work with other trades to accommodate relative positioning of essential and nonessential components in consideration of seismic interaction. 5. Notify Architect of any conflicts with or deviations from Contract Documents. Obtain direction before proceeding with work. B. Sequencing: 1. Do not install products on or provide attachment to concrete surfaces until concrete has fully cured in accordance with Section 033000. 1.06 SUBMITTALS A. See Section 013000 -Administrative Requirements, and Section 230001 for submittal procedures. B. Design Documents: Prepare and submit all information required for plan review and permitting by authorities having jurisdiction, including but not limited to floor plans, details, and calculations. C. Product Data: Provide manufacturer's standard catalog pages and data sheets for products, including materials, fabrication details, dimensions, and finishes. 1. Vibration Isolators: Include rated load capacities and deflections; include information on color coding or other identification methods for spring element load capacities. 2. Seismic Controls: Include seismic load capacities. D. Shop Drawings -Vibration Isolation Systems: 1. Include dimensioned plan views and sections indicating proposed arrangement of vibration isolators; indicate equipment weights and static deflections. 2. Vibration-Isolated Equipment Support Bases: Include base weights, including concrete fill where applicable; indicate equipment mounting provisions. E. Shop Drawings -Seismic Controls: 1. Include dimensioned plan views and sections indicating proposed HVAC component locations and distributed system routing, with locations and details of gravity supports and seismic restraints and associated attachments. 2. Identify mounting conditions required for equipment seismic qualification. 3. Identify anchor manufacturer, type, minimum embedment, minimum spacing, minimum member thickness, and minimum edge distance requirements. 4. Indicate proposed arrangement of distributed system trapeze support groupings. 5. Indicate proposed locations for distributed system flexible fittings and/or connections. 6. Indicate locations of seismic separations where applicable. 7. Include point load drawings indicating design loads transmitted to structure at each attachment location. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -2  Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC  F. Seismic Design Data: 1. Compile information on project-specific characteristics of actual installed HVAC components necessary for determining seismic design forces required to design appropriate seismic controls, including but not limited to the following. a. Component operating weight and center of gravity. b. Component elevation in the building in relation to the roof elevation (z/h). c. Component importance factor (Ip). d. For distributed systems, component materials and connection methods. e. Component amplification factor (ap) and component response modification factor (Rp), determined in accordance with ASCE 7 tables. f. Applicability of overstrength factor (for certain anchorage in concrete and masonry). 2. Include structural calculations, stamped or sealed by seismic controls designer, registered in the jurisdiction of the project, demonstrating suitability of seismic controls for seismic design forces. G. Certification for seismically qualified equipment; identify basis for certification such as ICC-ES or OSHPD. H. Evaluation Reports: For products specified as requiring evaluation and recognition by a qualified evaluation service, provide current evaluation reports. I. Manufacturer's Instructions: Indicate application conditions and limitations of use stipulated by product testing agency. Include instructions for storage, handling, protection, examination, preparation, and installation of product. J. Evidence of qualifications for seismic controls designer. K. Evidence of qualifications for manufacturer. L. Manufacturer’s detailed field testing and inspection procedures. M. Field quality control test reports. N. Product Data: 1. Provide manufacturer's product literature documenting compliance with PART 2 PRODUCTS. 2. Include seismic rating documentation for each isolator and restraint component accounting for horizontal, vertical, and combined loads. O. Shop Drawings: 1. Provide schedule of vibration isolator type with location and load on each. 2. Fully dimensioned fabrication drawings and installation details for vibration isolation bases, member sizes, attachments to isolators, and supported equipment. 3. Include auxiliary motor slide bases and rails, base weights, inertia bases, concrete weights, equipment static loads, support points, vibration isolators, and detailed layout of isolator location and orientation with static and dynamic load on each isolator. 4. Include selections from prescriptive design tables that indicate compliance with the applicable building code and the vibration isolator manufacturer's requirements. 5. Clearly indicate the load and capacity assumptions selected. Include copies of any calculations. 6. Include the calculations that indicate compliance with the applicable building code for seismic controls and the vibration isolator manufacturer's requirements. 7. Include the seal of the Professional Structural Engineer registered in the State in which the Project is located, on drawings and calculations which at a minimum include the following: 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -3  Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC  a. Seismic Restraint Details: Detailed drawings of seismic restraints and snubbers including anchorage details that indicate quantity, diameter, and depth of penetration, edge distance, and spacing of anchors. b. Equipment Seismic Qualification Certification: Certification by the manufacturer or responsible party that each piece of equipment provided will withstand seismic force levels as specified in the applicable building code for seismic controls. 1) Basis for Certification: Indicate whether the withstand certification is based on actual testing of assembled components, on calculations, or on historic data. 2) Indicate equipment to be sufficiently durable to resist design forces and or remain functional after the seismic event. c. Dimensioned outline drawings of equipment identifying center of gravity, locations, and provisions for mounting and anchorage. d. Detailed description of the equipment anchorage devices on which the certifications are based. e. Statement of Special Inspections: Prepared by the registered design professional in responsible charge. f. See Section 014533 for additional requirements. 1.07 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Comply with applicable building code. B. Maintain at the project site a copy of each referenced document that prescribes execution requirements. C. Seismic Controls Designer Qualifications: Registered professional engineer licensed in the State in which the Project is located and with minimum five years experience designing seismic restraints for nonstructural components. 1. Designer may be employed by the manufacturer of the seismic restraint products. D. Manufacturer Qualifications: Company specializing in manufacturing the products specified in this section with minimum ten years documented experience. 1. Member of Vibration Isolation and Seismic Control Manufacturers Association (VISCMA). E. All vibration isolation and seismic restraint devices shall be the product of a single manufacturer. F. Perform design and installation in accordance with applicable codes. G. The isolation manufacturer is to send a letter stating that they have inspected all of the vibration isolation units installed and they are installed properly and operating. H. Installer Qualifications: Company specializing in performing the work of this section with minimum ten years of experience. I. Testing Agency Qualifications: Independent firm specializing in performing testing and inspections of the type specified in this section. 1. See Section 014533 for additional requirements. J. Substitution of internally isolated mechanical equipment in lieu of the specified isolation of this Section must be approved for individual equipment units and is acceptable only if above acceleration loads are certified in writing by the equipment manufacturer and stamped and sealed by a licensed civil or structural engineer K. Welding: Qualify procedures and personnel according to AWS D1.1, "Structural Welding Code.-Steel." 1.08 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Deliver each item as a factory-assembled unit with protective crating and covering. B. Receive, inspect, handle, and store products in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. C. Provide disassembly and re-assembly as required to accommodate rigging and shipping. PART 2 PRODUCTS 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -4  Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC  2.01 VIBRATION ISOLATION SYSTEM MANUFACTURERS A. Acceptable manufacturers: 1. Mason Industries: www.mason-ind.com. 2. Kinetics Noise Control, Inc: www.kineticsnoise.com. 3. Vibration Eliminator Company, Inc: www.veco-nyc.com. 4. Vibration Mountings & Controls, Inc., https://www.thevmcgroup.com/ 2.02 VIBRATION ISOLATION REQUIREMENTS A. Design and provide vibration isolation systems to reduce vibration transmission to supporting structure from vibration-producing HVAC equipment and/or HVAC connections to vibration-isolated equipment. B. Comply with applicable general recommendations of ASHRAE (HVACA), where not in conflict with other specified requirements: C. General Requirements: 1. Select vibration isolators to provide required static deflection. 2. Select vibration isolators for uniform deflection based on distributed operating weight of actual installed equipment. 3. Select seismic type vibration isolators to comply with seismic design requirements, including conditions of equipment seismic certification where applicable. 4. Select vibration isolators for outdoor equipment to comply with wind design requirements. 5. Select vibration-isolated equipment support bases and associated vibration isolators to provide minimum 2-inch operating clearance beneath base unless otherwise indicated. 6. All calculations are to take into account frame shortening for a concrete building, if applicable. Obtain the ammount of Frame shortening from the project structural engineer. D. Equipment Isolation: As indicated in Part 3.. E. Piping Isolation: 1. Provide vibration isolators for piping supports: a. Located in equipment rooms. b. Located within 50 feet of connected vibration-isolated equipment and pressure-regulating valve (PRV) stations. c. For piping over 2 inch located below or within 50 feet of noise-sensitive areas indicated. 2. Minimum Static Deflection: a. First Three Supports Closest to Isolated Equipment: Same as static deflection of equipment; maximum of 2 inch deflection required. b. Remainder of Supports: 0.75 inch deflection unless otherwise indicated. 3. Suspended Piping, Nonseismic Applications: Use resilient material isolator hangers, spring isolator hangers, or combination resilient material/spring isolator hangers. 4. Floor-Mounted Piping, Nonseismic Applications: Use open (unhoused) spring isolators. 5. Floor-Mounted Piping, Seismic Applications: Use seismic type restrained spring isolators. 6. Use modular seal or approved resilient material where vibration-isolated piping penetrates building elements (e.g., walls, floors) arranged to prevent vibration transmission to structure. F. Thrust Restraint Applications: 1. Use thrust restraints to resist horizontal motion due to thrust for fan heads, suspended fans, and base-mounted and suspended air handling equipment operating at 2.0 inches wg or greater total static pressure. 2. Minimum Static Deflection: Same as static deflection of equipment. 3. Limit lateral movement to 0.25 inch or less unless otherwise indicated. 2.03 SEISMIC CONTROL SYSTEMS MANUFACTURERS A. Acceptable Manufacturers: 1. Mason Industries: www.mason-ind.com. 2. Kinetics Noise Control, Inc: www.kineticsnoise.com. 3. ISAT Seismic Bracing; https://www.isatsb.com/ 4. Eaton Corporation -TOLCO: www.eaton.com. 5. VMC Group; https://www.thevmcgroup.com/ 6. Source Limitations: Furnish seismic restraint system components and accessories produced by a single manufacturer and obtained from a single supplier. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -5  Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC  2.04 SEISMIC CONTROL REQUIREMENTS A. Design and provide HVAC component restraints, supports, and attachments suitable for seismic loads determined in accordance with applicable codes, as well as gravity and operating loads and other structural design considerations of the installed location. Include the effect of design wind loads for outdoor HVAC components. B. Seismic Design Criteria: Obtain from project Structural Engineer of Record. C. Component Importance Factor (Ip) for Risk Category IV (Essential Facilities): All HVAC components to be assigned a component importance factor (Ip) of 1.5 unless otherwise indicated. D. Component Importance Factor (Ip): HVAC components essential to life safety to be assigned a component importance factor (Ip) of 1.5 as indicated or as required. This includes but is not limited to: 1. HVAC components required to function for life safety purposes after an earthquake. 2. HVAC components that support or otherwise contain hazardous substances. 3. HVAC components that, if displaced, could inhibit the function of components in any trade with Ip of 1.5. E. Seismic Restraints: 1. Provide seismic restraints for HVAC components except where exempt according to applicable codes and specified seismic design criteria, as approved by authorities having jurisdiction. Verify all exemptions with AHJ. 2. Seismic Restraint Exemptions for IBC(2018)/ASCE 7(2016) and later edition projects as verified by the Seismic Controls Designer: a. Exemptions for Seismic Design Category C: 1) HVAC components where either of the following apply: (a) The component importance factor (Ip) is 1.0 and the component is positively attached to the structure. (b) The component weighs 20 pounds or less or, in the case of a distributed system, 5 pounds per foot or less. 2) HVAC piping with component importance factor (Ip) of 1.5 and nominal pipe size of 2 inch or less, where flexible connections, expansion loops, or other assemblies are provided between piping and associated components, and where piping is positively attached to the structure; exemption does not apply to piping constructed of low-deformability materials (e.g., cast iron, glass, nonductile plastics). b. Exemptions for Seismic Design Category D, E, and F: 1) Discrete HVAC components that are positively attached to the structure where either of the following apply: (a) The component weighs 400 pounds or less, has a center of mass located 4 feet or less above the adjacent floor level, flexible connections are provided between the component and associated ductwork, piping, and conduit, and the component importance factor (Ip) is 1.0. (b) The component weighs 20 pounds or less or, in the case of a distributed system, 5 pounds per foot or less. 2) HVAC piping with component importance factor (Ip) of 1.0 and nominal pipe size of 3 inch or less, or with component importance factor (Ip) of 1.5 and nominal pipe size of 1 inch or less, where flexible connections, expansion loops, or other assemblies are provided between piping and associated components, and where piping is positively attached to the structure; exemption does not apply to piping constructed of low-deformability materials (e.g., cast iron, glass, nonductile plastics). 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -6  Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC  c. Duct System Exemptions, All Seismic Design Categories: 1) Duct systems not designed to carry toxic, highly toxic, or flammable gases and not used for smoke control with component importance factor (Ip) of 1.0, where flexible connections or other assemblies are provided between duct system and associated components, where duct system is positively attached to the structure, and where one of the following apply: (a) Trapeze supported duct with trapeze assemblies using 3/8 inch diameter rod hangers not exceeding 12 inches in length from support point connection to the supporting structure, and the total weight supported by any single trapeze is 100 pounds or less. (b) Trapeze supported duct with trapeze assemblies using 1/2 inch diameter rod hangers not exceeding 12 inches in length from support point connection to the supporting structure, and the total weight supported by any single trapeze is 200 pounds or less. (c) Trapeze supported duct with trapeze assemblies using 1/2 inch diameter rod hangers not exceeding 24 inches in length from support point connection to the supporting structure, and the total weight supported by any single trapeze is 100 pounds or less. (d) Hanger supported duct with individual rod hangers 3/8 inch or 1/2 inch in diameter not exceeding 12 inches in length from support point connection to the supporting structure, and the total weight supported by any single rod is 50 pounds or less. 2) Duct systems not designed to carry toxic, highly toxic, or flammable gases and not used for smoke control, where there are provisions to avoid impact with other ducts or mechanical components or to protect ducts in the event of such impact, and where duct system is positively attached to the structure and has a cross sectional area of less than 6 square feet and weighs 20 pounds per foot or less. d. HVAC Piping Exemptions, All Seismic Design Categories: 1) HVAC piping where flexible connections, expansion loops, or other assemblies are provided between piping and associated components, where piping is positively attached to the structure, and where one of the following apply: (a) Trapeze supported piping weighing less than 10 pounds per foot, where all pipes supported meet size requirements for exemption as single pipes described under specific seismic design category exemptions above. (b) Trapeze supported piping with trapeze assemblies using 3/8 inch diameter rod hangers not exceeding 12 inches in length from support point connection to the supporting structure, where all pipes supported have a component importance factor (Ip) of 1.0 and meet size requirements for exemption as single pipes described under specific seismic design category exemptions above, and where the total weight supported by any single trapeze is 100 pounds or less. (c) Trapeze supported piping with trapeze assemblies using 1/2 inch diameter rod hangers not exceeding 12 inches in length from support point connection to the supporting structure, where all pipes supported have a component importance factor (Ip) of 1.0 and meet size requirements for exemption as single pipes described under specific seismic design category exemptions above, and where the total weight supported by any single trapeze is 200 pounds or less. (d) Trapeze supported piping with trapeze assemblies using 1/2 inch diameter rod hangers not exceeding 24 inches in length from support point connection to the supporting structure, where all pipes supported have a component importance factor (Ip) of 1.0 and meet size requirements for exemption as single pipes described under specific seismic design category exemptions above, and where the total weight supported by any single trapeze is 100 pounds or less. (e) Hanger supported piping with individual rod hangers 3/8 inch or 1/2 inch in diameter not exceeding 12 inches in length from support point connection to the supporting structure, where pipe has a component importance factor (Ip) of 1.0 and meets size requirements for exemption as single pipes described under specific seismic design category exemptions above, and where the total weight supported by any single rod is 50 pounds or less. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -7  Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC  3. Comply with applicable general recommendations of the following, where not in conflict with applicable codes, seismic design criteria, or other specified requirements: a. ASHRAE (HVACA). b. FEMA 412. c. FEMA 413. d. FEMA 414. e. FEMA E-74. f. SMACNA (SRM). 4. Seismic restraint capacities to be verified by a Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory (NRTL) or certified by an independent third-party registered professional engineer acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction. 5. Seismic Type Vibration Isolators: a. Comply with seismic design requirements, including conditions of equipment seismic certification where applicable. 6. External Seismic Snubber Assemblies: a. Provide quantity and arrangement of external seismic snubber assemblies as required to restrain equipment in all directions (both lateral and vertical). b. Do not use external seismic snubber assemblies that restrain equipment only in one or more lateral directions (but not vertical) except where uplift forces are zero or are addressed by other restraints. 7. Seismic Restraint Systems: a. Except where otherwise restricted, use of either cable or rigid restraints is permitted. b. Use only cable restraints to restrain vibration-isolated HVAC components, including distributed systems. c. Use only one restraint system type for a given HVAC component or distributed system (e.g., ductwork, piping) run; mixing of cable and rigid restraints on a given component/run is not permitted. d. Size restraint elements, including anchorage, to resist seismic loads as necessary to restrain HVAC component in all lateral directions; consider bracket geometry in anchor load calculations. e. Use rod stiffener clips to attach bracing to hanger rods as required to prevent rod buckling from vertical (upward) compressive load introduced by cable or rigid restraints loaded in tension, in excess of downward tensile load due to supported HVAC component weight. f. Select hanger rods and associated anchorage as required to accommodate vertical (downward) tensile load introduced by rigid restraints loaded in compression, in addition to downward tensile load due to supported HVAC component weight. g. Clevis hangers may only be used for attachment of transverse restraints; do not use for attachment of longitudinal restraints. h. Where seismic restraints are attached to clevis hangers, provide clevis bolt reinforcement accessory to prevent clevis hanger deformation. i. Do not introduce lateral loads on open bar joist chords or the weak axis of beams, or loads in any direction at other than panel points unless approved by project Structural Engineer of Record. 8. Ductwork Applications: a. Provide independent support and seismic restraint for in-line components (e.g., fans, heat exchangers, humidifiers) having an operating weight greater than 75 pounds. b. Positively attach appurtenances (e.g., dampers, louvers, diffusers) with mechanical fasteners. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -8  Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC  F. Seismic Attachments: 1. Attachments to be bolted, welded, or otherwise positively fastened without consideration of frictional resistance produced by the effects of gravity. 2. Post-Installed Concrete and Masonry Anchors: Evaluated and recognized by ICC Evaluation Service, LLC (ICC-ES) or qualified evaluation service acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction for compliance with applicable building code, and qualified for seismic applications; concrete anchors to be qualified for installation in both cracked and uncracked concrete. 3. Do not use power-actuated fasteners. 4. Do not use friction clips (devices that rely on mechanically applied friction to resist loads). Beam clamps may be used for supporting sustained loads where provided with restraining straps. 5. Comply with anchor minimum embedment, minimum spacing, minimum member thickness, and minimum edge distance requirements. 6. Concrete Housekeeping Pads: a. Increase size of pad as required to comply with anchor requirements. b. Provide pad reinforcement and doweling to ensure integrity of pad and connection and to provide adequate load path from pad to supporting structure. G. Seismic Interactions: 1. Include provisions to prevent seismic impact between HVAC components and other structural or nonstructural components. 2. Include provisions such that failure of a component, either essential or nonessential, does not cause the failure of an essential component. 3. Comply with minimum clearance requirements between HVAC equipment, distribution systems, and associated supports and fire protection sprinkler system drops and sprigs. H. Seismic Relative Displacement Provisions: 1. Use suitable fittings or flexible connections to accommodate: a. Relative displacements at connections between components, including distributed systems (e.g., ductwork, piping); do not exceed load limits for equipment utility connections. b. Relative displacements between component supports attached to dissimilar parts of structure that may move differently during an earthquake. c. Design displacements at seismic separations. d. Anticipated drifts between floors. 2. Include provisions to prevent interruption of utility service due to seismic displacements. I. California Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development (OSHPD) Preapprovals where applicable: 1. Manufacturer's certifications of seismic design of supports for nonstructural components to have current approval under OSHPD Preapproval of Manufacturer's Certification (OPM) program. 2. Special seismic certifications to have current approval under OSHPD Special Seismic Certification Preapproval (OSP) program. 2.05 VIBRATION ISOLATION SYSTEM PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. General: 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -9  Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC  1. All vibration isolators, base frames and inertia bases to conform to all uniform deflection and stability requirements under all operating loads. 2. Steel springs to function without undue stress or overloading. 3. Steel springs to operate in the linear portion of the load versus deflection curve over deflection range of not less than 50 percent above specified deflection. 4. Lateral to vertical stiffness ratio to not exceed 0.08 with spring deflection at minimum 75 percent of specified deflection. 5. All equipment mounted on vibration isolated bases to have minimum operating clearance of 2 inches between the base and floor or support beneath unless noted otherwise. 2.06 VIBRATION-ISOLATED EQUIPMENT SUPPORT BASES A. Manufacturers Standard: 1. Design: Sufficiently rigid to prevent misalignment or undue stress on machine, and to transmit design loads to isolators and snubbers. 2. Source Limitations: Furnish vibration-isolated equipment support bases and associated components and accessories produced by the same manufacturer as the vibration isolators and obtained from a single supplier. B. Vibration-Isolated Structural Steel Bases: 1. Description: Engineered structural steel frames with integral mounting provisions for vibration isolators, sized and configured for mounting of equipment. 2. Centrifugal Fan Applications: Provide adjustable motor slide rails as required. C. Vibration-Isolated Concrete Inertia Bases: 1. Description: Concrete-filled engineered steel forms with integral mounting provisions for vibration isolators, sized and configured for mounting of equipment. 2. Design: Sufficiently rigid to prevent misalignment or undue stress on machine, and to transmit design loads to isolators and snubbers. 3. Connecting Point: Reinforced to connect isolators and snubbers to base including template and fastening devices for equipment. 4. Minimum Base Depth: 6 inches. 5. Minimum Base Mass (Including Concrete): 1.5 times weight of supported equipment. 6. Concrete Reinforcement: Welded or tied reinforcing bars running both ways in a single layer. 7. Concrete: Filled on site with minimum 3000 psi concrete in accordance with Section 033000. 8. Centrifugal Fan Applications: Provide adjustable motor slide rails as required. 9. Pump Applications: Size and configure bases for piping elbow supports as required. 2.07 VIBRATION ISOLATORS A. General Requirements: 1. Source Limitations: Furnish vibration-isolators and associated accessories produced by a single manufacturer and obtained from a single supplier. 2. Resilient Materials for Vibration Isolators: Oil, ozone, and oxidant resistant. 3. Spring Elements for Spring Isolators: a. Color code or otherwise identify springs to indicate load capacity. b. Lateral Stability: Minimum lateral stiffness to vertical stiffness ratio of 0.8. c. Designed to operate in the linear portion of their load versus deflection curve over deflection range of not less than 50 percent above specified deflection. d. Designed to provide additional travel to solid of not less than 50 percent of rated deflection at rated load. e. Selected to provide designed deflection of not less than 75 percent of specified deflection. f. Selected to function without undue stress or overloading. 4. Seismic Snubbing Elements for Seismic Isolators: a. Air Gap: Between 0.125 inches and 0.25 inches unless otherwise indicated. b. Points of Contact: Cushioned with resilient material, minimum 0.25 inch thick; capable of being visually inspected for damage and replaced. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -10  Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC  B. Vibration Isolators for Nonseismic Applications: 1. Resilient Material Isolator Pads: a. Description: Single or multiple layer pads utilizing elastomeric (e.g., neoprene, rubber) or fiberglass isolator material. b. Pad Thickness: As required for specified minimum static deflection; minimum 0.25 inch thickness. c. Multiple Layer Pads: Provide bonded, galvanized sheet metal separation plate between each layer. 2. Resilient Material Isolator Mounts, Nonseismic: a. Description: Mounting assemblies for bolting equipment to supporting structure utilizing elastomeric (e.g., neoprene, rubber) or fiberglass isolator material; fail-safe type. 3. Open (Unhoused) Spring Isolators: a. Description: Isolator assembly consisting of single or multiple free-standing, laterally stable steel spring(s) without a housing. b. Bottom Load Plate: Nonskid, molded, elastomeric isolator material or steel with nonskid elastomeric isolator pad with provisions for bolting to supporting structure as required. c. Furnished with integral leveling device for positioning and securing supported equipment. 4. Housed Spring Isolators: a. Description: Isolator assembly consisting of single or multiple free-standing, laterally stable steel spring(s) within a metal housing. b. Furnished with integral elastomeric snubbing elements, nonadjustable type, for limiting equipment movement and preventing metal-to-metal contact between housing elements. c. Bottom Load Plate: Steel with nonskid, elastomeric isolator pad with provisions for bolting to supporting structure as required. d. Furnished with integral leveling device for positioning and securing supported equipment. 5. Restrained Spring Isolators, Nonseismic: a. Description: Isolator assembly consisting of single or multiple free-standing, laterally stable steel spring(s) within a metal housing designed to prevent movement of supported equipment above an adjustable vertical limit stop. b. Bottom Load Plate: Steel with nonskid elastomeric isolator pad with provisions for bolting to supporting structure as required. c. Furnished with integral leveling device for positioning and securing supported equipment. d. Provides constant free and operating height. 6. Resilient Material Isolator Hangers, Nonseismic: a. Description: Isolator assembly designed for installation in hanger rod suspension system utilizing elastomeric (e.g., neoprene, rubber) or fiberglass isolator material for the lower hanger rod connection. 7. Spring Isolator Hangers, Nonseismic: a. Description: Isolator assembly designed for installation in hanger rod suspension system utilizing single or multiple free-standing, laterally stable steel spring(s) in series with an elastomeric element for the lower hanger rod connection. b. Designed to accommodate misalignment of bottom hanger rod up to 30 degrees (plus/minus 15 degrees) without short-circuiting of isolation. 8. Combination Resilient Material/Spring Isolator Hangers, Nonseismic: a. Description: Isolator assembly designed for installation in hanger rod suspension system utilizing single or multiple free-standing, laterally stable steel spring(s) for the lower hanger rod connection and elastomeric (e.g., neoprene, rubber) or fiberglass isolator material for the upper hanger rod connection. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -11  Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC  b. Designed to accommodate misalignment of bottom hanger rod up to 30 degrees (plus/minus 15 degrees) without short-circuiting of isolation. 9. Thrust Restraints: a. Description: Assembly utilizing free-standing, laterally stable steel spring designed for resisting horizontal motion due to thrust (e.g., air pressure from a fan), and intended for installation in pairs. C. Vibration Isolators for Seismic Applications: 1. Resilient Material Isolator Mounts, Seismic: a. Description: Mounting assemblies for bolting equipment to supporting structure utilizing elastomeric (e.g., neoprene, rubber) isolator material; specifically designed and rated for seismic applications with integral snubbing in all directions. 2. Restrained Spring Isolators, Seismic: a. Description: Isolator assembly consisting of single or multiple free-standing, laterally stable steel spring(s) in series with elastomeric (e.g., neoprene, rubber) isolator material within a metal housing designed to prevent movement of supported equipment above an adjustable vertical limit stop; specifically designed and rated for seismic applications with integral snubbing in all directions. b. Bottom Load Plate: Steel with provisions for bolting to supporting structure as required. c. Furnished with integral leveling device for positioning and securing supported equipment. d. Provides constant free and operating height. 3. Resilient Material Isolator Hangers, Seismic: a. Description: Isolator assembly designed for installation in hanger rod suspension system utilizing elastomeric (e.g., neoprene, rubber) isolator material for the lower hanger rod connection; specifically designed and rated for seismic applications with vertical limit stop to prevent upward travel of hanger rod and cushion impact. 4. Spring Isolator Hangers, Seismic: a. Description: Isolator assembly designed for installation in hanger rod suspension system utilizing single or multiple free-standing, laterally stable steel spring(s) in series with an elastomeric element for the lower hanger rod connection; specifically designed and rated for seismic applications with vertical limit stop to prevent upward travel of hanger rod and cushion impact. b. Designed to accommodate misalignment of bottom hanger rod up to 30 degrees (plus/minus 15 degrees) without short-circuiting of isolation. 5. Combination Resilient Material/Spring Isolator Hangers, Seismic: a. Description: Isolator assembly designed for installation in hanger rod suspension system utilizing single or multiple free-standing, laterally stable steel spring(s) for the lower hanger rod connection and elastomeric (e.g., neoprene, rubber) isolator material for the upper hanger rod connection; specifically designed and rated for seismic applications with vertical limit stop to prevent upward travel of hanger rod and cushion impact. b. Designed to accommodate misalignment of bottom hanger rod up to 30 degrees (plus/minus 15 degrees) without short-circuiting of isolation. D. Non-Seismic Type: 1. All Elastomeric-Fiber Glass Pads: a. Configuration: Flat or molded. b. Thickness: 0.25 inch minimum. c. Assembly: Single or multiple layers using bonded, galvanized sheet metal separation plate between each layer with load plate providing evenly distributed load over pad surface. 2. Elastomeric Mounts: 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -12  Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC  a. Material: Oil, ozone, and oxidant resistant compounds. b. Assembly: Encapsulated load transfer plate bolted to equipment and base plate with anchor hole bolted to supporting structure. 3. Steel Springs: a. Assembly: Freestanding, laterally stable without housing. b. Leveling Device: Rigidly connected to equipment or frame. 4. Restrained Steel Springs: a. Housing: Rigid blocking during rigging prevents equipment installed and operating height from changing during temporary weight reduction. b. Equipment Wind Loading: Adequate means for fastening isolator top to equipment and isolator base plate to supporting structure. 5. Elastomeric Hangers: a. Housing: Steel construction containing elastomeric isolation element to prevent rod contact with housing and short-circuiting of isolating function. b. Incorporate steel load distribution plate sandwiching elastomeric element to housing. 6. Spring Hanger: a. Housing: Steel construction containing stable steel spring and integral elastomeric element preventing metal to metal contact. b. Bottom Opening: Sized to allow plus/minus 15 degrees rod misalignment. 7. Combination Elastomeric-Spring Hanger: a. Housing: Steel construction containing stable steel spring with elastomeric element in series isolating upper connection of hanger box to building structure. b. Bottom Opening: Sized to allow plus/minus 15 degrees rod misalignment. 8. Thrust Restraints: a. Housing: Steel construction containing stable steel spring and integral elastomeric element installed in pairs to resist air pressure thrusts. b. Bottom Openings: Sized to allow plus/minus 15 degrees rod misalignment. E. Seismic Type: 1. Coil Springs Consisting of Single Elements: a. Housing: Manufactured from cast iron material. b. Ductile Material: Designed and rated for seismic applications. c. Spring: Restrained by housing without significant degradation of vibration isolation capabilities during normal equipment operating conditions. d. Resilient Snubbing Grommet System: Incorporated and designed with clearances of no more than 0.25 inch in any direction preventing direct metal-to-metal contact between supported member and fixed restraint housing. e. Resilient Pad: Located in series with spring. f. Coil Springs: Color coded elements to have a lateral stiffness greater than 0.8 times the rated vertical stiffness with 50 percent overload capacity. g. Finish: Suitable for the application. 2. All Directional Elastomeric: a. Material: Molded from oil, ozone, and oxidant resistant compounds. b. Operating Parameters: Designed to operate within the isolator strain limits providing maximum performance and service life. c. Attachment Method: Encapsulated load transfer plate bolted to equipment and base plate with anchor hole bolted to supporting structure. d. Rating: Cast iron and aluminum housings rated for seismic restraint applications. e. Minimum Operating Static Deflections: Deflections indicated in project documents are not to exceed published load capacities. 2.08 EXTERNAL SEISMIC SNUBBER ASSEMBLIES A. Description: Steel snubbing assemblies designed for external attachment to both equipment and supporting structure that, as part of a complete system, restrain equipment motion in all directions during a seismic event while maintaining vibration isolation during normal operation. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -13  Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC  B. Seismic Snubbing Elements: 1. Air Gap: Between 0.125 inches and 0.25 inches unless otherwise indicated. 2. Points of Contact: Cushioned with resilient material, minimum 0.25 inch thick; capable of being visually inspected for damage and replaced. C. All Directional External: 1. Application: Minimum three (3) snubbers are required for each equipment installation, oriented properly to restrain isolated equipment in all directions. 2. Construction: Interlocking steel construction attached to the building structure and equipment in a manner consistent with anticipated design loads. 3. Performance: Equipment movement at each snubber location limited to a maximum of 0.25 inches in any direction without significantly degrading the vibration isolation capability of the isolator during normal operating conditions. 4. Resilient Pad: Minimum 0.25 inch thick cushions any impact and prevents metal-to-metal contact. D. Lateral External: 1. Application: Minimum three (3) snubbers are required for each stable equipment installation, oriented properly to restrain isolated equipment in all lateral directions where uplift forces are zero or addressed by other restraints. 2. Construction: Steel construction attached to the building structure and equipment in a manner consistent with anticipated design loads. 3. Performance: Equipment movement at each snubber location limited to a maximum of 0.25 inches in any direction without significantly degrading the vibration isolation capability of the isolator during normal operating conditions. 4. Resilient Pad: Minimum 0.25 inch thick cushions any impact and prevents metal-to-metal contact. E. Omni Directional External: 1. Application: Minimum four (4) snubbers are required for each stable equipment installation, oriented properly to restrain isolated equipment in all lateral directions. 2. Construction: Steel construction attached to the building structure and equipment in a manner consistent with anticipated design loads. 3. Performance: Equipment movement at each snubber location limited to a maximum of 0.25 inches in any direction without significantly degrading the vibration isolation capability of the isolator during normal operating conditions. 4. Resilient Pad: Minimum 0.25 inch thick cushions any impact and prevents metal-to-metal contact. F. Horizontal Single Axis External: 1. Application: Minimum four (4) snubbers are required for each stable equipment installation, oriented properly to restrain isolated equipment in all lateral directions where uplift forces are zero or addressed by other restraints. 2. Construction: Steel construction attached to the building structure and equipment in a manner consistent with anticipated design loads. 3. Performance: Equipment movement at each snubber location limited to a maximum of 0.25 inches in any direction without significantly degrading the vibration isolation capability of the isolator during normal operating conditions. 4. Resilient Pad: Minimum 0.25 inch thick cushions any impact and prevents metal-to-metal contact. 2.09 SEISMIC RESTRAINT SYSTEMS A. Description: System components and accessories specifically designed for field assembly and attachment of seismic restraints. B. Cable Restraints: 1. Comply with ASCE 19. 2. Cables: Pre-stretched, galvanized steel wire rope with certified break strength. 3. Cable Connections: Use only swaged end fittings. Cable clips and wedge type end fittings are not permitted in accordance with ASCE 19. 4. Use protective thimbles for cable loops where potential for cable damage exists. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -14  Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC  C. Rigid Restraints: Use MFMA-4 steel channel (strut), steel angle, or steel pipe for structural element; suitable for both compressive and tensile design loads. D. Cable Restraints: 1. Wire Rope: Steel wire strand cables sized to resist seismic loads in all lateral directions. 2. Protective Thimbles: Eliminates potential for dynamic cable wear and strand breakage. 3. Size: Based on the lesser of cable capacity or anchor load taking into account bracket geometry. 4. Connections: a. Use overlapping wire rope U clips, cable clamping bolts, swaged sleeves or seismically rated tool-less wedge insert lock connectors. b. Internally brace clevis hanger bracket cross bolt to prevent deformation. 5. Vertical Suspension Rods: Attach required bracing of sufficient strength to prevent rod buckling from vertical compression forces utilizing series of attachment clips. E. Rigid Restraints: 1. Structural Element: Sized to resist seismic loads in all lateral directions and carry both compressive and tensile loading. 2. Size: Based on the lesser of cable capacity or anchor load taking into account bracket geometry. 3. Connections: Internally brace clevis hanger bracket cross bolt to prevent deformation. 4. Static Support System: Anchorage capable of carrying additional tension loads generated by the vertical component of the rigid brace compression which is additive to any static load requirements on the system. 5. Vertical Suspension Rods: Attached required bracing of sufficient strength to prevent rod buckling from vertical compression forces utilizing series of attachment clips. 2.10 VIBRATION-ISOLATED AND/OR SEISMICALLY ENGINEERED ROOF CURBS A. Manufacturers: 1. Vibration-Isolated and/or Seismically Engineered Roof Curbs: a. Kinetics Noise Control, Inc; ______: www.kineticsnoise.com. b. Mason Industries; ______: www.mason-ind.com. c. Vibration Eliminator Company, Inc; ______: www.veco-nyc.com. B. Vibration Isolation Curbs: 1. Nonseismic Curb Rail: a. Location: Between existing roof curb and rooftop equipment. b. Construction: Aluminum. c. Integral vibration isolation to comply with requirements of this section. d. Weather exposed components consist of corrosion resistant materials. 2. Nonseismic Curb: a. Location: Between structure and rooftop equipment. b. Construction: Aluminum. c. Integral vibration isolation to comply with requirements of this section. d. Weather exposed components consist of corrosion resistant materials. 3. Seismic Curb: a. Location: Between structure and rooftop equipment. b. Construction: Steel. c. Integral vibration isolation to comply with requirements of this section. d. Snubbers consist of minimum 0.25 inch thick resilient pads to avoid metal-to-metal contact without compromising vibration isolating capabilities. e. Weather exposed components consist of corrosion resistant materials. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -15  Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC  PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 EXAMINATION A. Verify that field measurements are as shown on the drawings. B. Verify that mounting surfaces are ready to receive vibration isolation and/or seismic control components and associated attachments. C. Verify that conditions are satisfactory for installation prior to starting work. 3.02 CODE-REQUIRED SPECIAL INSPECTIONS A. Arrange work to accommodate tests and/or inspections performed by Special Inspection Agency employed by Owner or Architect in accordance with Section 014533 and statement of special inspections as required by applicable building code. B. Frequency of Special Inspections: Where special inspections are designated as continuous or periodic, arrange work accordingly. 1. Continuous Special Inspections: Special Inspection Agency to be present in the area where the work is being performed and observe the work at all times the work is in progress. 2. Periodic Special Inspections: Special Inspection Agency to be present in the area where work is being performed and observe the work part-time or intermittently and at the completion of the work. C. Seismic special inspections include, but are not limited to: 1. Seismically Qualified Equipment: Verification that label, anchorage, and mounting comply with the certificate of compliance. 2. Installation and anchorage of piping systems designed to carry hazardous materials and their associated mechanical units for Seismic Design Categories C, D, E, and F; periodic inspection. 3. Installation and anchorage of ductwork designed to carry hazardous materials for Seismic Design Categories C, D, E and F; periodic inspection. 4. Installation and anchorage of vibration isolation systems for Seismic Design Categories C, D, E, and F where the approved Contract Documents require a nominal clearance of 1/4 inch or less between equipment support frame and seismic restraint; periodic inspection. 5. Verification of required clearances between HVAC equipment, distribution systems, and associated supports and fire protection sprinkler system drops and sprigs for Seismic Design Categories C, D, E, and F; periodic inspection. D. Prior to starting work, Contractor to submit written statement of responsibility to authorities having jurisdiction and to Owner acknowledging awareness of special requirements contained in the statement of special inspections. E. Special Inspection Agency services do not relieve Contractor from performing inspections and testing specified elsewhere. 3.03 INSTALLATION A. Install products in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Install anchors and fasteners in accordance with ICC Evaluation Services, LLC (ICC-ES) or OSHPD evaluation report conditions of use where applicable. C. Field-Welding (where approved by Architect): Comply with Section 230529 and Section 055000. D. Install flexible piping connections to provide sufficient slack for vibration isolation and/or seismic relative displacements as indicated or as required. E. Vibration Isolation Systems: 1. Vibration-Isolated Equipment Support Bases: a. Provide specified minimum clearance beneath base. 2. Spring Isolators: 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -16  Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC  a. Position equipment at operating height; provide temporary blocking as required. b. Lift equipment free of isolators prior to lateral repositioning to avoid damage to isolators. c. Level equipment by adjusting isolators gradually in sequence to raise equipment uniformly such that excessive weight or stress is not placed on any single isolator. 3. Isolator Hangers: a. Use precompressed isolator hangers where required to facilitate installation and prevent damage to equipment utility connection provisions. b. Locate isolator hangers at top of hanger rods in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. 4. Thrust Restraints: 5. Clean debris from beneath vibration-isolated equipment that could cause short-circuiting of isolation. 6. Use elastomeric grommets for attachments where required to prevent short-circuiting of isolation. 7. Adjust isolators to be free of isolation short circuits during normal operation. 8. Do not overtighten fasteners such that resilient material isolator pads are compressed beyond manufacturer's maximum recommended deflection. F. Seismic Controls: 1. Provide specified snubbing element air gap; remove any factory-installed spacers, debris, or other obstructions. 2. Use only specified components, anchorage, and hardware evaluated by seismic design. Comply with conditions of seismic certification where applicable. 3. Where mounting hole diameter exceeds bolt diameter by more than 0.125 inch, use epoxy grout, elastomeric grommet, or welded washer to reduce clearance to 0.125 inch or less. 4. Equipment with Sheet Metal Housings: a. Use Belleville washers to distribute stress over a larger surface area of the sheet metal connection interface as approved by manufacturer. b. Attach additional steel as approved by manufacturer where required to transfer loads to structure. c. Where mounting surface is irregular, do not shim housing; reinforce housing with additional steel as approved by manufacturer. 5. Concrete Housekeeping Pads: a. Size in accordance with seismic design to meet anchor requirements. b. Install pad reinforcement and doweling in accordance with seismic design to ensure integrity of pad and associated connection to slab. 6. Seismic Restraint Systems: a. Do not attach seismic restraints and gravity supports to dissimilar parts of structure that may move differently during an earthquake. b. Install restraints within permissible angles in accordance with seismic design. c. Install cable restraints straight between component/run and structural attachment; do not bend around other nonstructural components or structural elements. d. Install cable restraints for vibration-isolated components slightly slack to prevent short-circuiting of isolation. e. Install hanger rod stiffeners where indicated using only specified clamps; do not weld stiffeners to hanger rod. 3.04 INSTALLATION -GENERAL A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Bases: 1. Set steel bases for one inch clearance between housekeeping pad and base. 2. Set concrete inertia bases for 2 inches clearance between housekeeping pad and base. 3. Adjust equipment level. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -17  Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC  C. On closed spring isolators, adjust so side stabilizers are clear under normal operating conditions. D. Prior to making piping connections to equipment with operating weights substantially different from installed weights, block up equipment with temporary shims to final height. When full load is applied, adjust isolators to load to allow shim removal. E. Provide pairs of horizontal limit springs on fans with more than 6.0 inches WC static pressure, and on hanger supported, horizontally mounted axial fans. F. Support piping connections to equipment mounted on isolators using isolators or resilient hangers for scheduled distance. 1. Up to 4 Inches Pipe Size: First three points of support. 2. 5 to 8 Inches Pipe Size: First four points of support. 3. 10 inches Pipe Size and Over: First six points of support. 4. Select three hangers closest to vibration source for minimum 1.0 inch static deflection or static deflection of isolated equipment. Select remaining isolators for minimum 1.0 inch static deflection or 1/2 static deflection of isolated equipment. 3.05 INSTALLATION -SEISMIC A. Comply with: 1. ASHRAE (HVACA) Handbook -HVAC Applications. 2. FEMA 412. 3. FEMA 413. 4. FEMA 414. 5. FEMA E-74. 6. SMACNA (SRM). B. Seismic Snubbers: 1. Provide on all isolated equipment, piping and ductwork. 2. Provide minimum of four seismic snubbers located close to isolators. 3. Snub equipment designated for post-disaster use to 0.05 inch maximum clearance. 4. Snub all other equipment between 0.15 inch and 0.25 inch clearance. C. Floor and Base-Mounted Equipment, Vibration Isolated Equipment and associated Vibration and Seismic Controls for Connections: 1. Install equipment anchorage items designed to resist seismic design force in any direction. 2. Install vibration and seismic controls designed to include base and isolator requirements. 3. Provide flexible connections between equipment and interconnected piping. 4. Provide isolators and restraints designed for amplified code forces per ASCE 7 and with demonstrated ability to resist required forces including gravity, operational and seismic forces. 5. Where equipment is not designed to be point loaded, provide base capable of transferring gravity and seismic demands from equipment to isolator base plate anchorage. 6. Where concrete floor thickness is less than required for expansion anchor installation, install through bolt in lieu of expansion anchor. 7. Where timber/wood floor or other substrate is inadequate for installation of lag bolts, screws or other mechanical fasteners, install supplemental framing or blocking to transfer loads to structural elements. D. Suspended Mechanical Equipment: 1. Provide supports and bracing to resist seismic design force in any direction. 2. Provide flexible connections between equipment and interconnected piping. 3. Brace equipment hung from spring mounts using cable or other bracing that will not transmit vibration to the structure. 4. Use of proprietary restraint systems with a certificate of compliance, verified and listed by an accredited inspection body is acceptable (pending shop drawing approval), as an alternative to project specific seismic bracing design. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -18  Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC  E. Wall mounted Mechanical Equipment: 1. Provide support and bracing to resist seismic design force in any direction. 2. Install backing plates or blocking as required to deliver load to primary wall framing members. 3. Anchoring to gypsum wallboard, plaster or other wall finish that has not been engineered to resist imposed loads is not permitted. F. Piping: 1. Provide seismic bracing in accordance ASCE 7. 2. Provide supports, braces, and anchors to resist gravity and seismic design forces. 3. Provide flexible connections between floor mounted equipment and suspended piping; between unbraced piping and restrained suspended items; as required for thermal movement; at building separations and seismic joints; and wherever relative differential movements could damage pipe in an earthquake. 4. Brace resiliently supported pipe with cable bracing or alternate means designed to prevent transmission of vibrations and noise to the structure. 5. Brace every run 5.0 feet or more in length with two transverse and one longitudinal bracing locations. 6. Pipes and Connections Constructed of Ductile Materials (copper, ductile iron, steel or aluminum and brazed, welded or screwed connections): a. Provide transverse bracing at spacing not more than 40.0 feet on center. b. Provide longitudinal bracing at spacing not more than 80.0 feet on center. 7. Pipes and Connections Constructed of Non Ductile Materials (cast iron, no-hub, plastic or grooved coupling pipe): a. Provide transverse bracing at spacing not more than 20.0 feet on center. b. Provide longitudinal bracing at spacing not more than 40.0 feet on center. 8. Provide lateral restraint for risers at not more than 30 feet on center or as required for horizontal runs, whichever is less. 9. Piping Explicitly Exempt from Seismic Bracing Requirements: a. Provide flexible connections between piping and connected equipment, including in-line devices such as VAV boxes and reheat coils. b. Install piping consistent with ASCE 7, such that swinging of the pipes will not cause damaging impact with adjacent components, finishes, or structural framing while maintaining clear horizontal distance of 67 percent of the hanger length between subject components. c. Provide swing restraints as required to control potential impact due to limited space between subject components. 10. Re-use of Existing Hangers: a. Re-using existing hangers at locations of seismic bracing are to be judged on a case.by-case basis by the registered project design professional and approved by the architect and structural engineer. b. Unless otherwise shown on drawings, it is assumed all hangers supporting new piping, located at a seismic brace, will be new. G. Ductwork: 1. Provide seismic bracing for ducts with cross sectional area greater than 6 sq ft (independent of duct contents). 2. Provide seismic bracing for all ducts containing hazardous materials. 3. Provide supports, braces, and anchors to resist gravity and seismic design forces. 4. Install ducts and duct risers designed to accommodate interstory drift. 5. Independently support in-line devices weighing more than 20 pounds. 6. Independently support and brace all in-line devices weighing more than 75 pounds. 7. Provide unbraced piping attached to braced in-line equipment with adequate flexibility to accommodate differential displacements. 8. Positively attach dampers, louvers, diffusers and similar appurtenances to ductwork with mechanical fasteners. 9. Install duct supports designed to resist not less than 150 percent of the duct weight. 10. The use of power driven fasteners is prohibited. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -19  Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC  H. Tanks: 1. Install tank anchorage, tank legs and/or supporting structure designed to resist design force. 2. Provide flexible connections between tank and interconnected piping. 3.06 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. See Section 014000 -Quality Requirements, for additional requirements. B. Inspect vibration isolation and/or seismic control components for damage and defects. C. Provide manufacturer representative or authorized technician services to assist with inspection and testing of vibration isolation systems and seismic controls. Submit a detailed copy of manufacturer recommended inspection, testing, and field report procedures. D. Vibration Isolation Systems: 1. Verify isolator static deflections. 2. Verify required clearance beneath vibration-isolated equipment support bases. 3. Verify vibration isolation performance during normal operation; investigate sources of isolation short circuits. E. Seismic Controls: 1. Verify snubbing element air gaps. F. Correct deficiencies and replace damaged or defective vibration isolation and/or seismic control components. G. Submit detailed reports indicating inspection and testing results and corrective actions taken. H. Inspect isolated equipment after installation and submit report. Include static deflections. I. Perform code required testing and inspections of the installation in accordance with the requirements of the AHJ and with Section 014533. 3.07 VIBRATION ISOLATION SCHEDULE A. Pipe Isolation Schedule. Refer to Part 2 B. Equipment Isolation Schedule. C. Requirements are based on 2019 ASHRAE Applications Chapter 47, Table 47. For items not covered and spans greater than 30 feet, refer to Table 47 and accompaning Notes. D. Base and isolator types and requirements are as follows: Base Types are as follows: A. No base, isolators attached directly to equipment. B. Structural steel rails or base. C. Concrete inertia base. D. Curb-mounted base, roof curb.  Isolator types are as follows: A. Spring isolator. B. Spring isolator with limit stop, restrained. C. Spring hanger isolator. F. Combination spring/elastomer hanger. G. Pad type elastomer mounting.  Equipment Type  Horsepower and Other  RPM  Base Type  Isolator Type  Min. Defl., in.  58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -20  Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC  Refrigeration Machines & Chillers  Reciprocating and scroll  All  All  A. B if air cooled  B  1.50  Centrifugal, screw  All  All  A. B if air cooled.  B  2.50  Open and hermetic centrifugal  All  All  A  B  1.50  Absorption  All  All  A  B  1.50  Air Compressors & Vacuum Pumps  Tank-mounted horizontal  Up to 10  All  A  A or C  1.50  15 & up  All  C  A or C  1.50  Tank-mounted vertical  All  All  C  A or C  1.50  Base-mounted  All  All  C  A or C  1.50  Large reciprocating  All  All  C  A or C  1.50  Pumps  Close-coupled  Up to 7.5  All  C  A or C  1.00  10 & up  All  C  A or C  1.50  Large in-line  5 to 25  All  A  A or C  1.50  30 and up  All  A  A or C  1.50  End suction and split case  Up to 40  All  C  A or C  1.50  50 to 125  All  C  A or C  1.50  150 and up  All  C  A or C  2.50  Cooling Towers  All  Up to 300 and with VFD  A  B  4  301 to 500  A  B  4  500 & up  A  B  4  Boilers  Boilers – large  All  All  B  B  1.50  58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -21  Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC  58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -22  Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC  Up to 22 in. diameter  All  All  B  A or C  1.0  24 in. diameter and up  Up to 40  Up to 300  B  A or C  3.50  300 to 500  B  A or C  2.50  501 & up  B  A or C  1.50  50 and up  Up to 300  C  A or C  3.50  300 to 500  C  A or C  2.50  501 & up  C  A or C  1.50  Propeller Fans  Wall-mounted  All  All  –  G  0.25  Roof-mounted  All  All  D  B  1.50  Heat Pumps  Inside -horizontal  All  _  A or C  1.0  Inside-vertical floor mounted  All  A  F  0.75  On Roof  All  All  B  1.0  Condensing Units including AC and CRAC units with compressors.  Inside  All  All  A  1.5  On Roof  All  All  B  2.0  Packaged AHU, AC, H & V units  All  Up to 10  All  –  A  2  15 and up to 4 in. s.p.  Up to 300  –  A  3.50  301 to 500  –  A  2.50  501 & up  –  A  1.50  15 and up,4 in. s.p. & up  Up to 300  B-2  A  3.50  301 to 500  B-2  A  2.50  501 & up  B-2  A  1.50  Packaged Rooftop Equipment  All  All  ---. B  1.0  Ducted Rotating Equipment  Small fans, fan-powered  Up to 600 cfm  All  –  A  1.0  58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -23  Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC  boxes, unit heaters  601 cfm & up All  –  A  1.0  Engine-Driven Generators  All  All  B  B  2.5  1. END OF SECTION 230548 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -24  Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC  SECTION 230548 VIBRATION CONTROLS FOR HVAC PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Vibration isolation requirements. B. Vibration-isolated equipment support bases. C. Vibration isolators. D. Vibration-isolated and/or seismically engineered roof curbs. 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Section 014533 -Code-Required Special Inspections and Procedures. B. Section 033000 -Cast-in-Place Concrete. C. Section 055000 -Metal Fabrications: Materials and requirements for fabricated metal supports. D. Section 230001 -General Provisions for Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning E. Section 230529 -Hangers and Supports for HVAC Piping and Equipment. 1.03 REFERENCE STANDARDS A. The applicable versions of reference standards shall be the latest version as adopted and amended by the AHJ. 1.04 ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS A. Coordination: 1. Coordinate selection and arrangement of vibration isolation and/or seismic control components with the actual equipment to be installed. 2. Coordinate the work with other trades to provide additional framing and materials required for installation. 3. Coordinate compatibility of support and attachment components with mounting surfaces at the installed locations. 4. Notify Architect of any conflicts with or deviations from Contract Documents. Obtain direction before proceeding with work. B. Sequencing: 1. Do not install products on or provide attachment to concrete surfaces until concrete has fully cured in accordance with Section 033000. 1.05 SUBMITTALS A. See Section 013000 -Administrative Requirements, and Section 230001 for submittal procedures. B. Design Documents: Prepare and submit all information required for plan review and permitting by authorities having jurisdiction, including but not limited to floor plans, details, and calculations. C. Product Data: Provide manufacturer's standard catalog pages and data sheets for products, including materials, fabrication details, dimensions, and finishes. 1. Vibration Isolators: Include rated load capacities and deflections; include information on color coding or other identification methods for spring element load capacities. D. Field quality control test reports. E. Product Data: 1. Provide manufacturer's product literature documenting compliance with PART 2 PRODUCTS. F. Shop Drawings: 1. Provide schedule of vibration isolator type with location and load on each. 2. Fully dimensioned fabrication drawings and installation details for vibration isolation bases, member sizes, attachments to isolators, and supported equipment. 3. Include auxiliary motor slide bases and rails, base weights, inertia bases, concrete weights, equipment static loads, support points, vibration isolators, and detailed layout of isolator location and orientation with static and dynamic load on each isolator. 4. Include selections from prescriptive design tables that indicate compliance with the applicable building code and the vibration isolator manufacturer's requirements. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -1  Vibration Controls for HVAC  1.06 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Comply with applicable building code. B. Maintain at the project site a copy of each referenced document that prescribes execution requirements. C. All vibration isolation and seismic restraint devices shall be the product of a single manufacturer. D. Perform design and installation in accordance with applicable codes. E. The isolation manufacturer is to send a letter stating that they have inspected all of the vibration isolation units installed and they are installed properly and operating. F. Installer Qualifications: Company specializing in performing the work of this section with minimum ten years of experience. G. Testing Agency Qualifications: Independent firm specializing in performing testing and inspections of the type specified in this section. H. Welding: Qualify procedures and personnel according to AWS D1.1, "Structural Welding Code.-Steel." 1.07 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Receive, inspect, handle, and store products in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 VIBRATION ISOLATION SYSTEM MANUFACTURERS A. Acceptable manufacturers: 1. Mason Industries: www.mason-ind.com. 2. Kinetics Noise Control, Inc: www.kineticsnoise.com. 3. Vibration Eliminator Company, Inc: www.veco-nyc.com. 4. Vibration Mountings & Controls, Inc., https://www.thevmcgroup.com/ 2.02 VIBRATION ISOLATION REQUIREMENTS A. Equipment Isolation: As indicated in Part 3.. B. Design and provide vibration isolation systems to reduce vibration transmission to supporting structure from vibration-producing HVAC equipment and/or HVAC connections to vibration-isolated equipment. C. Comply with applicable general recommendations of ASHRAE (HVACA), where not in conflict with other specified requirements: D. General Requirements: E. Piping Isolation: 1. Provide vibration isolators for piping supports: a. Located in equipment rooms. b. Located within 50 feet of connected vibration-isolated equipment and pressure-regulating valve (PRV) stations. c. For piping over 2 inch located below or within 50 feet of noise-sensitive areas indicated. 2. Minimum Static Deflection: 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -2  Vibration Controls for HVAC  a. First Three Supports Closest to Isolated Equipment: Same as static deflection of equipment; maximum of 2 inch deflection required. b. Remainder of Supports: 0.75 inch deflection unless otherwise indicated. 3. Suspended Piping, Nonseismic Applications: Use resilient material isolator hangers, spring isolator hangers, or combination resilient material/spring isolator hangers. 4. Floor-Mounted Piping, Nonseismic Applications: Use open (unhoused) spring isolators. 5. Use modular seal or approved resilient material where vibration-isolated piping penetrates building elements (e.g., walls, floors) arranged to prevent vibration transmission to structure. F. Thrust Restraint Applications: 1. Use thrust restraints to resist horizontal motion due to thrust for fan heads, suspended fans, and base-mounted and suspended air handling equipment operating at 4.0 in.w.g. or greater total static pressure. 2. Minimum Static Deflection: Same as static deflection of equipment. 2.03 VIBRATION ISOLATION SYSTEM PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. General: 1. All vibration isolators, base frames and inertia bases to conform to all uniform deflection and stability requirements under all operating loads. 2. Steel springs to function without undue stress or overloading. 3. Steel springs to operate in the linear portion of the load versus deflection curve over deflection range of not less than 50 percent above specified deflection. 4. All equipment mounted on vibration isolated bases to have minimum operating clearance of 2 inches between the base and floor or support beneath unless noted otherwise. 2.04 VIBRATION-ISOLATED EQUIPMENT SUPPORT BASES A. Manufacturers: 1. Vibration-Isolated Equipment Support Bases: a. Kinetics Noise Control, Inc: www.kineticsnoise.com. b. Mason Industries: www.mason-ind.com. c. Vibration Eliminator Company, Inc: www.veco-nyc.com. 2. Design: Sufficiently rigid to prevent misalignment or undue stress on machine, and to transmit design loads to isolators and snubbers. 3. Source Limitations: Furnish vibration-isolated equipment support bases and associated components and accessories produced by the same manufacturer as the vibration isolators and obtained from a single supplier. B. Vibration-Isolated Structural Steel Bases: 1. Description: Engineered structural steel frames with integral mounting provisions for vibration isolators, sized and configured for mounting of equipment. 2. Centrifugal Fan Applications: Provide adjustable motor slide rails as required. C. Vibration-Isolated Concrete Inertia Bases: 1. Description: Concrete-filled engineered steel forms with integral mounting provisions for vibration isolators, sized and configured for mounting of equipment. 2. Design: Sufficiently rigid to prevent misalignment or undue stress on machine, and to transmit design loads to isolators and snubbers. 3. Connecting Point: Reinforced to connect isolators and snubbers to base including template and fastening devices for equipment. 4. Minimum Base Depth: 6 inches. 5. Minimum Base Mass (Including Concrete): 1.5 times weight of supported equipment. 6. Concrete Reinforcement: Welded or tied reinforcing bars running both ways in a single layer. 7. Concrete: Filled on site with minimum 3000 psi concrete in accordance with Section 033000. 8. Centrifugal Fan Applications: Provide adjustable motor slide rails as required. 9. Pump Applications: Size and configure bases for piping elbow supports as required. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -3  Vibration Controls for HVAC  2.05 VIBRATION ISOLATORS A. Manufacturers: 1. Vibration Isolators: a. Kinetics Noise Control, Inc: www.kineticsnoise.com. b. Mason Industries: www.mason-ind.com. c. Vibration Eliminator Company, Inc: www.veco-nyc.com. B. General Requirements: 1. Resilient Materials for Vibration Isolators: Oil, ozone, and oxidant resistant. 2. Spring Elements for Spring Isolators: a. Color code or otherwise identify springs to indicate load capacity. b. Lateral Stability: Minimum lateral stiffness to vertical stiffness ratio of 0.8. c. Designed to operate in the linear portion of their load versus deflection curve over deflection range of not less than 50 percent above specified deflection. d. Designed to provide additional travel to solid of not less than 50 percent of rated deflection at rated load. e. Selected to provide designed deflection of not less than 75 percent of specified deflection. f. Selected to function without undue stress or overloading. C. Vibration Isolators for Nonseismic Applications: 1. Resilient Material Isolator Pads: a. Description: Single or multiple layer pads utilizing elastomeric (e.g., neoprene, rubber) or fiberglass isolator material. b. Pad Thickness: As required for specified minimum static deflection; minimum 0.25 inch thickness. c. Multiple Layer Pads: Provide bonded, galvanized sheet metal separation plate between each layer. 2. Resilient Material Isolator Mounts, Nonseismic: a. Description: Mounting assemblies for bolting equipment to supporting structure utilizing elastomeric (e.g., neoprene, rubber) or fiberglass isolator material; fail-safe type. 3. Housed Spring Isolators: a. Description: Isolator assembly consisting of single or multiple free-standing, laterally stable steel spring(s) within a metal housing. b. Furnished with integral elastomeric snubbing elements, nonadjustable type, for limiting equipment movement and preventing metal-to-metal contact between housing elements. c. Bottom Load Plate: Steel with nonskid, elastomeric isolator pad with provisions for bolting to supporting structure as required. d. Furnished with integral leveling device for positioning and securing supported equipment. 4. Restrained Spring Isolators, Nonseismic: a. Description: Isolator assembly consisting of single or multiple free-standing, laterally stable steel spring(s) within a metal housing designed to prevent movement of supported equipment above an adjustable vertical limit stop. b. Bottom Load Plate: Steel with nonskid elastomeric isolator pad with provisions for bolting to supporting structure as required. c. Furnished with integral leveling device for positioning and securing supported equipment. d. Provides constant free and operating height. 5. Resilient Material Isolator Hangers, Nonseismic: 6. Spring Isolator Hangers, Nonseismic: 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -4  Vibration Controls for HVAC  a. Description: Isolator assembly designed for installation in hanger rod suspension system utilizing single or multiple free-standing, laterally stable steel spring(s) in series with an elastomeric element for the lower hanger rod connection. b. Designed to accommodate misalignment of bottom hanger rod up to 30 degrees (plus/minus 15 degrees) without short-circuiting of isolation. D. Non-Seismic Type ibration Isolators: PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 EXAMINATION A. Verify that field measurements are as shown on the drawings. B. Verify that mounting surfaces are ready to receive vibration isolation and/or seismic control components and associated attachments. C. Verify that conditions are satisfactory for installation prior to starting work. 3.02 CODE-REQUIRED SPECIAL INSPECTIONS A. Arrange work to accommodate tests and/or inspections performed by Special Inspection Agency employed by Owner or Architect in accordance with Section 014533 and statement of special inspections as required by applicable building code. B. Frequency of Special Inspections: Where special inspections are designated as continuous or periodic, arrange work accordingly. 1. Continuous Special Inspections: Special Inspection Agency to be present in the area where the work is being performed and observe the work at all times the work is in progress. 2. Periodic Special Inspections: Special Inspection Agency to be present in the area where work is being performed and observe the work part-time or intermittently and at the completion of the work. C. Prior to starting work, Contractor to submit written statement of responsibility to authorities having jurisdiction and to Owner acknowledging awareness of special requirements contained in the statement of special inspections. D. Special Inspection Agency services do not relieve Contractor from performing inspections and testing specified elsewhere. 3.03 INSTALLATION A. Install products in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Install anchors and fasteners in accordance with ICC Evaluation Services, LLC (ICC-ES) or OSHPD evaluation report conditions of use where applicable. C. Secure fasteners according to manufacturer's recommended torque settings. D. Field-Welding (where approved by Architect): Comply with Section 230529 and Section 055000. E. Install flexible piping connections to provide sufficient slack for vibration isolation and/or seismic relative displacements as indicated or as required. F. Vibration Isolation Systems: 1. Vibration-Isolated Equipment Support Bases: a. Provide specified minimum clearance beneath base. 2. Spring Isolators: a. Position equipment at operating height; provide temporary blocking as required. b. Lift equipment free of isolators prior to lateral repositioning to avoid damage to isolators. c. Level equipment by adjusting isolators gradually in sequence to raise equipment uniformly such that excessive weight or stress is not placed on any single isolator. 3. Isolator Hangers: 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -5  Vibration Controls for HVAC  a. Use precompressed isolator hangers where required to facilitate installation and prevent damage to equipment utility connection provisions. b. Locate isolator hangers at top of hanger rods in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. 4. Thrust Restraints: a. Adjust restraint movement under normal operating static pressure. 5. Clean debris from beneath vibration-isolated equipment that could cause short-circuiting of isolation. 6. Use elastomeric grommets for attachments where required to prevent short-circuiting of isolation. 7. Adjust isolators to be free of isolation short circuits during normal operation. 8. Do not overtighten fasteners such that resilient material isolator pads are compressed beyond manufacturer's maximum recommended deflection. 3.04 INSTALLATION -GENERAL A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Bases: 1. Set steel bases for one inch clearance between housekeeping pad and base. 2. Set concrete inertia bases for 2 inches clearance between housekeeping pad and base. 3. Adjust equipment level. C. On closed spring isolators, adjust so side stabilizers are clear under normal operating conditions. D. Prior to making piping connections to equipment with operating weights substantially different from installed weights, block up equipment with temporary shims to final height. When full load is applied, adjust isolators to load to allow shim removal. E. Provide pairs of horizontal limit springs on fans with more than 6.0 inches WC static pressure, and on hanger supported, horizontally mounted axial fans. F. Support piping connections to equipment mounted on isolators using isolators or resilient hangers for scheduled distance. 1. Up to 4 Inches Pipe Size: First three points of support. 2. 5 to 8 Inches Pipe Size: First four points of support. 3. 10 inches Pipe Size and Over: First six points of support. 4. Select three hangers closest to vibration source for minimum 1.0 inch static deflection or static deflection of isolated equipment. Select remaining isolators for minimum 1.0 inch static deflection or 1/2 static deflection of isolated equipment. 3.05 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. See Section 014000 -Quality Requirements, for additional requirements. B. Inspect vibration isolation and/or seismic control components for damage and defects. C. Provide manufacturer representative or authorized technician services to assist with inspection and testing of vibration isolation systems. Submit a detailed copy of manufacturer recommended inspection, testing, and field report procedures. D. Vibration Isolation Systems: 1. Verify isolator static deflections. 2. Verify required clearance beneath vibration-isolated equipment support bases. 3. Verify vibration isolation performance during normal operation; investigate sources of isolation short circuits. E. Correct deficiencies and replace damaged or defective vibration isolation and/or seismic control components. F. Submit detailed reports indicating inspection and testing results and corrective actions taken. G. Inspect isolated equipment after installation and submit report. Include static deflections. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -6  Vibration Controls for HVAC  H. Perform code required testing and inspections of the installation in accordance with the requirements of the AHJ and with Section 014533. 3.06 VIBRATION ISOLATION SCHEDULE A. Pipe Isolation Schedule. Refer to Part 2 B. Equipment Isolation Schedule. C. Requirements are based on 2019 ASHRAE Applications Chapter 47, Table 47. For items not covered and spans greater than 30 feet, refer to Table 47 and t accompaning Notes. D. Base and vibration isolator types and requirements are as follows: Base Types are as follows: A. No base, isolators attached directly to equipment. B. Structural steel rails or base. C. Concrete inertia base. D. Curb-mounted base, roof curb.  Isolator types are as follows: A. Spring isolator. B. Spring isolator with limit stop, restrained. C. Spring hanger isolator. F. Combination spring/elastomer hanger. G. Pad type elastomer mounting.  Equipment Type  Horsepower and Other  RPM  Base Type  Isolator Type  Min. Defl., in.  Refrigeration Machines & Chillers  Reciprocating and scroll  All  All  A. B if air cooled  B  1.50  Centrifugal, screw  All  All  A. B if air cooled.  B  2.50  Open and hermetic centrifugal  All  All  A  B  1.50  Absorption  All  All  A  B  1.50  Air Compressors & Vacuum Pumps  Tank-mounted horizontal  Up to 10  All  A  A or C  1.50  15 & up  All  C  A or C  1.50  Tank-mounted vertical  All  All  C  A or C  1.50  58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -7  Vibration Controls for HVAC  Base-mounted  All  All  C  A or C  1.50  Large reciprocating  All  All  C  A or C  1.50  Pumps  Close-coupled  Up to 7.5  All  C  A or C  1.00  10 & up  All  C  A or C  1.50  Large in-line  5 to 25  All  A  A or C  1.50  30 and up  All  A  A or C  1.50  End suction and split case  Up to 40  All  C  A or C  1.50  50 to 125  All  C  A or C  1.50  150 and up  All  C  A or C  2.50  Cooling Towers  All  Up to 300 and with VFD  A  B  4  301 to 500  A  B  4  500 & up  A  B  4  Boilers  Boilers – large (Scotch marine , Fire-tube)  All  All  B  B  1.50  Boilers -Condensing  All  All  B  B  1.50  Boilers -Water tube  All  All  A  G  0.12  Boilers –Modular -when above retail or spaces other than residences  All  All  A  G  0.12  Boilers -All Types – when directly above residences  All  All  B  B  1.0  Beeching and piping from boilers with mechanical  All within 50 pipe diameters.  All  A  A  1.0  58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -8  Vibration Controls for HVAC  draft fans above or below residences  Axial Fans, Fan Heads, Cabinet Fans, Fan Sections  Up to 22 in. diameter  All  All  - A or C  1.0  24 in. diameter and above  Up to 2 in. s.p.  Up to 300  B-2  A or C  3.50  301 to 500  C  A or C  2.50  501 & up  B  A or C  1.50  24 in. diameter and above  2.1 in s.p and up  Up to 300  B-2  A or C  3.50  301 to 500  C  A or C  2.50  501 & up  B  A or C  1.50  Centrifugal Fans  Up to 22 in. diameter  All  All  B  A or C  1.0  24 in. diameter and up  Up to 40  Up to 300  B  A or C  3.50  300 to 500  B  A or C  2.50  501 & up  B  A or C  1.50  50 and up  Up to 300  C  A or C  3.50  300 to 500  C  A or C  2.50  501 & up  C  A or C  1.50  Propeller Fans  Wall-mounted  All  All  –  G  0.25  Roof-mounted  All  All  D  B  1.50  Heat Pumps  Inside -horizontal  All  _  A or C  1.0  Inside-vertical floor mounted  All  A  F  0.75  On Roof  All  All  B  1.0  Condensing Units  Inside  All  All  A  1.5  On Roof  All  All  B  2.0  58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -9  Vibration Controls for HVAC  including AC and CRAC units with compressors.  Packaged AHU, AC, H & V units  All  Up to 10  All  –  A  2  15 and up to 4 in. s.p.  Up to 300  –  A  3.50  301 to 500  –  A  2.50  501 & up  –  A  1.50  15 and up,4 in. s.p. & up  Up to 300  B-2  A  3.50  301 to 500  B-2  A  2.50  501 & up  B-2  A  1.50  Packaged Rooftop Equipment  All  All  ---. B  1.0  Ducted Rotating Equipment  Small fans, fan-powered boxes, unit heaters  Up to 600 cfm  All  –  A  1.0  601 cfm & up  All  –  A  1.0  Engine-Driven Generators  All  All  –  B  2.5  58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230548 -10  Vibration Controls for HVAC  SECTION 230549 NOISE CONTROL AND ACOUSTICAL PERFORMANCE PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and General Provisions for Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning Work, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 1 Specification Sections apply to this Section. 1.02 SUMMARY A. It is the objective of this Specification to provide the necessary design requirements for the noise control measures and acoustical performance criteria for mechanical systems. B. Work in this section includes the providing of labor, materials, equipment and services necessary for a complete installation of sound control for every mechanical system including piping and ductwork within and on the roof of the building, complete, as shown and specified per the contract documents and all applicable codes and authorities having jurisdiction for the following: 1. Sound linings 2. Soundproofing of construction 3. External soundproofing 1.03 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Section 079200 -Joint Sealants: Sealing acoustical gaps in construction other than gypsum board or plaster work. B. Section 092116 -Gypsum Board Assemblies: Sealing acoustical gaps in gypsum board walls. C. Section 092300 -Gypsum Plastering: Sealing acoustical gaps in gypsum plaster work. D. Section 092400 -Cement Plastering: Sealing acoustical gaps in Portland cement plaster work. E. Section 092613 -Gypsum Veneer Plastering: Sealing acoustical gaps in gypsum veneer plaster work. F. Section 230547 -Vibration Controls for HVAC G. Section 230548 -Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC H. Section 233100 -HVAC Ducts and Casings. I. Section 233300 -Air Duct Accessories. J. Section 232113 -Hydronic Piping K. Section 232213 -Steam and Condensate Heating Piping 1.04 CODE AND REFERENCE STANDARDS A. Published Specifications' standards, tests or recommended methods of trade, industry or governmental organizations that apply to work in this Section, latest Edition. B. Comply with all applicable national, state and local codes. Refer to General Provisions Section for additional reference standards. C. AABC (NSTSB)  .D. NEBB (STDS)  -Procedural Standard for Measurement of Sound and Vibration E. AMCA 300  -Reverberant Room Method for Sound Testing of Fans F. AMCA 301  -Methods for Calculating Fan Sound Ratings from Laboratory Test Data G. AMCA 302  -Application of Sone Ratings for Non-Ducted Air Moving Devices H. AMCA 303  -Application of Sound Power Level Ratings for Fans I. ANSI S1.8  -American National Standard Reference Values for Levels Used in Acoustics and Vibrations 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230549 -1  Noise Control and Acoustical Performance  J. ANSI S1.13  -American National Standard Measurement of Sound Pressure Levels in Air K. ANSI S12.1  -American National Standard Guidelines for the Preparation of Standard Procedures to Determine the Noise Emission from Sources L. ASHRAE Std 62.1-2019  -Ventilation for Acceptable Indoor Air Quality M. ASHRAE (HVACA)-2015  -ASHRAE Handbook -HVAC Applications N. ASTM A653/A653M -Standard Specification for Steel Sheet, Zinc-Coated (Galvanized) or Zinc-Iron Alloy-Coated (Galvannealed) by the Hot-Dip Process O. ASTM E477 -Standard Test Method for Laboratory Measurements of Acoustical and Airflow Performance of Duct Liner Materials and Prefabricated Silencers P. ASTM E596 -Standard Test Method for Laboratory Measurement of Noise Reduction of Sound-Isolating Enclosures Q. ASTM C553 -Mineral Fiber Blanket And Felt Insulation. R. ASTM C612 -Mineral Fiber Block And Board Thermal Insulation. S. ASTM E84-Surface Burning Characteristics Of Building Materials. T. ASTM G21 -Standard Practice for Determining Resistance of Synthetic Polymeric Materials to Fungi U. UL 94  -Tests for Flammability of Plastic Materials for Parts in Devices and Appliances V. UL 723 -Surface Burning Characteristics Of Building Materials. W. UL 181-Factory-Made Air Ducts And Air Connectors X. ASTM C1071 -Standard Specification For Fibrous Glass Duct Lining Insulation Y. ASTM C423 -Standard Test Method For Sound Absorption And Sound Absorption Coefficients By The Reverberation Room Method Z. ASTM E795 -Standard Practices For Mounting Test Specimens During Sound Absorption Tests AA. ASTM C919 -Standard Practice For Use Of Sealants In Acoustical Applications BB. NFPA 90A -Standard For The Installation Of Air-Conditioning And Ventilating Systems CC. AHRI 270 (SI/I-P)  -Sound Performance Rating of Outdoor Unitary Equipment DD. AHRI 575  -Method of Measuring Machinery Sound Within an Equipment Space EE. AHRI 885 with Addendum 1 -Procedure For Estimating Occupied Space Sound Levels In The Application Of Air Terminals And Air Outlets FF. ASTM E1414/E1414M -Standard Test Method For Airborne Sound Attenuation Between Rooms Sharing A Common Ceiling Plenum. GG. SMACNA (DCS)  -HVAC Duct Construction Standards Metal and Flexible 1.05 SUBMITTAL AND DATA REQUIREMENTS A. See Section 013000 -Administrative Requirements, for submittal procedures. B. Submit data for each product indicated. C. Product Data: Provide catalog information indicating, materials, dimensional data, pressure losses, and acoustical performance. D. Shop Drawings: Indicate assembly, materials, thicknesses, dimensional data, pressure losses, acoustical performance, layout, and connection details. E. Design Data: Provide engineering calculations, referenced to specifications and AHRI 270, AMCA 301, AMCA 302, AMCA 303, and ANSI S12.1 standards indicating that maximum room sound levels are not exceeded. F. Test Reports: Indicate dynamic insertion loss and noise generation values of silencers. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230549 -2  Noise Control and Acoustical Performance  G. Manufacturer's Installation Instructions: Indicate installation procedures necessary to maintain integrity of sound isolation. H. Manufacturer's Field Reports: Indicate installation is complete and in accordance with instructions. I. Warranty Documentation: Submit manufacturer warranty and ensure that forms have been completed in Owner's name and registered with manufacturer. J. Sound Linings: 1. Certification that sound lining meets erosion test method described in UL Publication No. 181. 2. Certification that sound lining meets ASTM standards C1071, G21 and G22. 3. Include product description, list of materials for each service, and locations. 4. Submit manufacturer's installation instructions. K. Sound traps and silencers 1. Include certified test data of sound attenuation and self-generated flow noise. 1.06 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Applicator: Company specializing in sound trap construction with five years minimum experience. B. Manufacturer Qualifications: Company specializing in manufacturing the type of products specified in this section, with minimum three years of documented experience. C. Design application of duct silencers under direct supervision of a Professional Engineer experienced in design of this work and licensed the State in which the Project is located. D. Perform Work in accordance with AHRI 575, AMCA 300, or ANSI S1.13 standards and recommendations of ASHRAE Std 68. E. Acoustical Criteria: 1. Noise levels due to equipment and ductwork shall confor to noise criteria established by the acoustic consultant. F. MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT ACOUSTICAL DESIGN PERFORMANCE 1. Air Distribution System: a. Air Control Device Noise: 1) Maximum permissible sound-power levels in octave bands of airborne transmission through the combination of grille, registers, diffusers, and terminal units or related pressure reducing devices, when operated at the maximum inlet pressure and cfm in installed condition per plans and specifications shall be as per the acoutic consultants criteria. b. The project criterion of NC-35 for private offices and NC-40 for all other spaces over which the box is located shall be certified at the design air flow rate and 1.5"w.g. inlet pressure and 0.3"w.g. discharge pressure. 1) The manufacturer shall, in addition to meeting the above sound power limits, test or provide substantiating data showing that all units have been tested in a mock-up office ceiling plenum. The mock-up office test shall be representative of the project conditions in terms of: (a) Ceiling plenum depth and project ceiling type and ceiling grid type. (b) Light fixtures and return air provisions. (NOTE: For worst-case scenario, the light fixture and/or return air grille shall be located directly below the unit.) (c) Project inlet and discharge ductwork (i.e., hard ductwork). (d) Mock-up office walls shall terminate at the slab above, unless the project conditions indicate otherwise. 2) The units shall be tested at the maximum design air flow rates and specified inlet pressures of 1.5" wg and downstream pressure of 0.3" w.g. 2. Acoustical Performance Within Equipment Spaces: a. Equipment room noise levels and noise transmission to adjacent buildings shall comply with all Federal, State and City Noise Ordinances. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230549 -3  Noise Control and Acoustical Performance  3. Motor Acoustical Performance: a. Motor drives for pumps and refrigeration machine, when installed per plans and specifications, shall operate with noise levels not exceeding 90 dB(A). b. Noise levels shall be determined in accordance with IEEE Standard #85 Test "Procedure for Airborne Noise Measurements on Rotating Electric Equipment." 4. Refrigeration Machine Gear Train Acoustical Performance: a. The gear train assembly (between drive and compressor) when operating at the refrigeration machine rated capacity per plans and specifications and tested in accordance with the latest version of AGMA 295 shall have noise levels not exceeding 90dB(A). 5. Refrigeration Machine Acoustical Performance: a. The maximum permissible noise levels under design operating conditions and low load conditions, when measured in accordance with the latest version of AHRI Standard 575 specified methods and qualifications shall not exceed 90 dB(A). 1.07 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS A. Conform to applicable Building Code for sound levels at the property line. B. For NYC applications, conform to NYC Building Code for sound levels at adjacent residential building windows. C. Comply with applicable codes for sound levels between wall partitions. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 MANUFACTURERS A. Sound-Linings: 1. CertainTeed Corp. 2. Johns-Manville Corp. 3. Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp. B. Duct Silencers 1. Price Industries, Inc 2. SEMCO LLC, Flakt Woods Group 3. Vibro-Acoustics, A Swegon Group Company 4. IAC Acoustics, A Division of Sound Seal; ______ 2.02 SOUND LINING A. Fibrous glass conforming to the requirements of ASTM C 1071 and corrosion requirements of ASTM C 665.. B. Packaging: Sound liner material containers shall be marked by manufacturer with appropriate ASTM standard designation, type and grade, and maximum use temperature. C. Storage: Store and protect products in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions. Store in a dry indoor location. Protect insulation materials from moisture and soiling. D. Do not install liner that has been damaged or wet. Remove damaged or wet liner from the jobsite E. Facing for low pressure duct, Pressure Class 2" and less, liners. 1. Airstream Finish: neoprene or acrylic coated 100% coverage with acrylic coating with a United States Environmental Protection Agency registered anti-microbial agent proven resistant to microbial growth per ASTM C 1338 when tested per ASTM Standards G21 and G22. 2. Stenciled NFPA 90A and 90B. F. Facing for medium and high pressure duct, Pressure class greater than 2", liner: 1. Finish: Perforated 28 percent minimum open area 24 USSG (0.7 mm) sheet metal. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230549 -4  Noise Control and Acoustical Performance  G. Exposure to moisture or weather 1. Where lining could be exposed to weather or other sources of moisture, provide Armacell AP coil flex elastomeric duct liner insulation with Micronan if the liner material will be in contact with moisture. Material to be ASTM E84 25/50 rated for use in airstream and plenums and comply with relevant code flame and smoke ratings. 2. Where lining could be exposed to weather or other sources of moisture and in medium and high pressure systems, protective plastic film shall be provided between air stream and fill to prevent contact of the liner material with moisture. Protective plastic film shall be as approved, and comply with relevant flame and smoke ratings. a. Protective plastic film shall be protected by a perforated inner sheet metal liner. H. Minimum thickness: 1. In ductwork less than 10 sq. ft cross section: 1 inch (25 mm). 2. In ductwork greater than 10 sq. ft cross section: 2 inch (25 mm). 3. In plenums: 2 inch (50 mm). 4. Minimum density: a. In ductwork: 1-1/2 lb per cu ft (24 kg/cu m). b. In plenums: 3 lb per cu ft (48 kg/cu m). I. Flamespread: maximum 25. J. Fuel contributed and smoke developed: maximum 50. K. Suitable for duct velocity of 5000 fpm (20.5 m/sec). L. Dynamic loss coefficient: maximum 1.2. M. K Factor: maximum 0.25 BTU in/hr/deg F/sq ft (36 mW/m/K). N. Noise reduction coefficient: for 1 inch (25 mm) thick lining: minimum NRC = 0.70 when tested in accordance with ASTM C423 in Type A mounting. 1. Similar to Johns Manville Permacote Linacoustic meeting ASTM C1071. O. Adhesive and Sealer: 1. In conformance with NFPA 90A. 2. Maximum fire hazard ratings; as specified in insulation. 3. Adhesive: similar to Benjamin Foster 81-99. 4. Sealer: similar to Johns Manville Superseal or Benjamin Foster 82-07. 5. In conformance with ASTM C919. 2.03 TRANSFER AIR DUCTS AND CROSS-TALK SILENCERS A. Fabricate in accordance with SMACNA (DCS) HVAC Duct Construction Standards. 2.04 FAN PLENUM AND EQUIPMENT ACOUSTICAL CASING PANELS A. Factory Prefabricated. Vibro-Acoustics, Type PS1B or approved equal. B. 4" ( 100 mm) Minimum thickness. Tongue and groove construction. C. Pressure Rating: 10" w.c. D. Shell: 1. Interior: minimum 22 gauge (8.5 mm) perforated galvanized steel. Perforated 23% minimum open area (3/32" (2.4 mm) diameter holes on 3/16" (5 mm) staggered centers 2. Exterior: minimum 18 gauge ( xx mm) galvanized steel. E. Filler: 1. Flame spread: maximum 25. 2. Fuel contributed and smoke development: maximum 50. 3. Inert, mildew and vermin proof. 4. No voids or settling. F. Acoustical Performance: 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230549 -5  Noise Control and Acoustical Performance  1. Minimum sound absorption coefficients tested in accordance with ASTM C4237 shall be as follows: 2. Minimum Sound Transmission Loss tested in accordance with ASTM E90 shall be as follows: Octave Band Center Frequency(Hz)  125  250  500  1000  2000  4000  Absorption Coefficient  0.89  1.20  1.16  1.09  1.01  1.03  Octave Band Center Frequency(Hz)  125  250  500  1000  2000  4000  Transmission Loss(dB)  23  30  42  51  59  58  2.05 NON-HARDENING CAULKING: A. Guaranteed to be permanently elastic. B. Similar to Tremco Polybutene. 2.06 DUCTWORK LAGGING A. Acoustic Insulation: Mass loaded, 2 inch thick, 3 to 5 lb/cu ft density glass fiber or mineral wool insulation. B. Covering: Plaster or Gypsum board with surface weight minimum 4 lb/sq ft. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 SOUND LININGS A. Adhere duct liner to duct wall with full coverage of adhesive conforming to ASTM C919. B. Secure Insulation with mechanical fasteners per SMACNA, NAIMA or duct liner manufacturer's recommendations. Pin length shall be such as to limit compression of liner. C. All exposed edges of duct liner shall be factory or field coated. For systems with air flow in excess of 2,500 fpm (12.7 m/sec) a metal nosing shall be installed in all liner leading edges, trailing edges, and at all seams. D. Repair all unprotected penetrations, tears and rips in the surface of the liner with liner adhesive meeting ASTM C919 or Johns Manville Superseal. E. Dimensions of lined ductwork are clear inside dimensions after lining has been installed. F. Provide 28% open perforated metal liner and plastic film, meeting the same fire and smoke characteristics as the duct liner, between air stream and duct liner to prevent any intermingling of the air stream with the liner material. G. Extent of ductwork sound linings: 1. All supply and return ducts in mechanical equipment rooms, fan rooms or a minimum distance indicated from discharge of HVAC units and/or fans, whichever is greater. a. Exceptions: 1) fume hoods, 2) bio-hazard. 3) wet exhaust. 4) dust collector. 5) hospital and healthcare facilities 6) laboratory facilities 7) elsewhere noted or indicated 2. All ducts upstream and downstream of all fans for minimum distance indicated. a. Exceptions: 1) fume hoods. 2) bio-hazard. 3) wet exhaust. 4) dust collector. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230549 -6  Noise Control and Acoustical Performance  5) hospital and healthcare facilities 6) laboratory facilities 7) elsewhere noted or indicated 3. All toilet exhaust branch ducts. a. Lining can be deleted if duct configuration has at least two 90° elbows between the closest air inlets of the men's and/or women's toilet rooms. 4. All ducts downstream of Air Terminal Unit Boxes (CV, VAV, FPVAV) for a minimum distance indicated. a. Exceptions: 1) kitchens 2) fume hoods. 3) bio-hazard. 4) wet exhaust. 5) dust collector. 6) hospital and healthcare facilities 7) laboratory facilities 8) elsewhere noted or indicated 5. All plenums on intake side of return and exhaust fans a. Plenum lining shall be 2 inch (50 mm) thick, 3 lb (48 kg) density. b. Provide lining on plenum walls, ceilings and sheet metal floors. c. Exceptions: 1) kitchen exhaust 2) fume hoods. 3) hazardous exhaust 4) bio-hazard exhaust 5) wet exhaust. 6) dust collector. 7) hospital and healthcare facilities 8) laboratory facilities 9) elsewhere noted or indicated 6. All plenums on discharge side of supply fans. a. Plenum lining shall be 2 inch (50 mm) thick, 3 lb (48 kg) density. b. Provide lining for plenum walls, ceilings and sheet metal floors. c. Exceptions: 1) hospital and healthcare facilities 2) laboratory facilities 3) Kitchens 4) elsewhere noted or indicated 7. All air transfer ducts and cross-talk silencer ducts. 8. Return air stub ducts at MER walls and shaft intake openings for full length. 9. All ductwork serving Conference Rooms, Meeting Rooms, Classrooms, Ballrooms,and Studios and other acoustically sensitive spaces. 10. Where indicated on drawings. 11. Where ductwork velocities exceed 2500 fpm, (12.7 m/s) provide special acoustical duct construction similar to United McGill Corp. Type "K-27", or sound traps as directed. 12. Exposed supply ductwork in a space that is to be painted shall be acoustically lined in lieu of external insulation. 3.02 DUCT SILENCERS A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations and instructions to obtain published performance. B. Maximum static pressure loss: Refer to schedules. C. Support duct silencers independent of ducts 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230549 -7  Noise Control and Acoustical Performance  3.03 DUCTWORK LAGGING A. Where indicated, lag ductwork by wrapping with insulation and covering. Apply covering to be air tight. Do not attach covering rigidly to ductwork. 3.04 SOUNDPROOF CONSTRUCTION FOR DUCT PENETRATIONS: A. Required for openings between ductwork and following constructions: 1. Equipment room walls. 2. Floors, except in shafts. 3. Sound rated partition or ceiling construction 4. Soundproofing: a. Opening to be framed with maximum 1/4 inch gap between frame opening and penetrating service. b. Pack openings with fibrous glass blanket or board for full depth of penetration. c. Caulk each side of opening with non-hardening, non-aging caulking compound. 3.05 TESTS A. Noise Criterion Levels 1. After air systems are properly air balanced, the resulting octave band noise levels should be measured by acoustical consultant in all spaces specified to determine compliance. 2. If any design noise levels are exceeded, the air balancer should check all air moving devices to insure all fan systems are operating at the lowest rpm and static pressure to deliver (exhaust) the design cfm (l/s) from the most remote point. If the balancer needs to make a sheave change to accomplish this, the change should be at no charge to the owner. END OF SECTION 230549 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230549 -8  Noise Control and Acoustical Performance  SECTION 230593 TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR HVAC PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Testing, adjustment, and balancing of air systems. B. Testing, adjustment, and balancing of hydronic, steam, and refrigerating systems. C. Measurement of final operating condition of HVAC systems. D. Sound measurement of equipment operating conditions. E. Vibration measurement of equipment operating conditions. F. Reuse and testing of existing systems. G. Existing systems TAB. H. Verifying that automatic control devices are functioning properly. I. Commissioning activities. J. Reporting results of activities and procedures specified in this Section. 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Section 012100 -Allowances: Inspection and testing allowances. B. Section 014000 -Quality Requirements: Employment of testing agency and payment for services. C. 230900 -HVAC Instrumentation and Controls D. 230993 -Sequence of Operations 1.03 REFERENCE STANDARDS A. AABC (NSTSB) -AABC National Standards for Total System Balance, 7th Edition; 2016. B. ASHRAE Std 110 -Methods of Testing Performance of Laboratory Fume Hoods; 2016. C. ASHRAE Std 111 -Measurement, Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing of Building HVAC Systems; 2008. D. NEBB (TAB) -Procedural Standards for Testing Adjusting and Balancing of Environmental Systems; 2015, Eighth Edition. E. SMACNA (TAB) -HVAC Systems Testing, Adjusting and Balancing; 2002. 1.04 SUBMITTALS A. See Section 013000 -Administrative Requirements, for submittal procedures. B. TAB Plan: Submit a written plan indicating the testing, adjusting, and balancing standard to be followed and the specific approach for each system and component. 1. Submit to Architect. 2. Submit six weeks prior to starting the testing, adjusting, and balancing work. 3. Include certification that the plan developer has reviewed Contract Documents, the equipment and systems, and the control system with the Architect and other installers to sufficiently understand the design intent for each system. 4. Include at least the following in the plan: a. List of all air flow, water flow, sound level, system capacity and efficiency measurements to be performed and a description of specific test procedures, parameters, formulas to be used. b. Copy of field checkout sheets and logs to be used, listing each piece of equipment to be tested, adjusted and balanced with the data cells to be gathered for each. c. Discussion of what notations and markings will be made on the duct and piping drawings during the process. d. Final test report forms to be used. e. Detailed step-by-step procedures for TAB work for each system and issue, including: 1) Terminal flow calibration (for each terminal type). 2) Diffuser proportioning. 3) Branch/submain proportioning. 4) Total flow calculations. 5) Rechecking. 6) Diversity issues. f. Procedures for formal deficiency reports, including scope, frequency and distribution. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230593 -1  Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing for HVAC  C. Control System Coordination Reports: Communicate in writing to the controls installer all setpoint and parameter changes made or problems and discrepancies identified during TAB that affect, or could affect, the control system setup and operation. D. Final Report: Indicate deficiencies in systems that would prevent proper testing, adjusting, and balancing of systems and equipment to achieve specified performance. 1. Revise TAB plan to reflect actual procedures and submit as part of final report. 2. Submit draft copies of report for review prior to final acceptance of Project. Provide final copies for Architect and for inclusion in operating and maintenance manuals. 3. Include actual instrument list, with manufacturer name, serial number, and date of calibration. 4. Include signature of TAB firm who certifies the report. 5. Provide table of Contents with the total number of pages defined for each section of the report. Number each page in the report. 6. Provide summary of contents including the following: a. Indicated versus final performance. b. Notable characteristics of systems. c. Description of system operation sequence if it varies from the Contract Documents. 7. Provide nomenclature sheets for each item of equipment. 8. Provide notes to explain why certain final data in the body of reports varies from indicated values. 9. Provide test conditions for fans and pump performance forms including the following: a. Settings for outside-, return-, and exhaust-air dampers. b. Conditions of filters. c. Cooling coil, wet-and dry-bulb conditions. d. Face and bypass damper settings at coils. e. Fan drive settings including settings and percentage of maximum pitch diameter. f. Settings for supply-air, static-pressure controller. g. Other system operating conditions that affect performance. 10. Provide system Diagrams: Include schematic layouts of air and hydronic distribution systems. Present each system with single-line diagram and include the following: a. Quantities of outside, supply, return, and exhaust airflows. b. Water and steam flow rates. c. Duct, outlet, and inlet sizes. d. Pipe and valve sizes and locations. e. Terminal units. f. Balancing stations. g. Position of balancing devices. 11. Form of Test Reports: Where the TAB standard being followed recommends a report format use that; otherwise, follow ASHRAE Std 111. 12. Units of Measure: Report data in I-P (inch-pound) units only. 13. Include the following on the title page of each report: E. Project Record Documents: Record actual locations of flow measuring stations. PART 2 PRODUCTS -NOT USED 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230593 -2  Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing for HVAC  PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS A. Perform total system balance in accordance with one of the following: 1. AABC (NSTSB), AABC National Standards for Total System Balance. 2. NEBB Procedural Standards for Testing Adjusting Balancing of Environmental Systems. B. Begin work after completion of systems to be tested, adjusted, or balanced and complete work prior to Substantial Completion of the project. C. Where HVAC systems and/or components interface with life safety systems, including fire and smoke detection, alarm, and control, coordinate scheduling and testing and inspection procedures with the authorities having jurisdiction. D. TAB Agency Qualifications: 1. Company specializing in the testing, adjusting, and balancing of systems specified in this section. 2. Having minimum of three years documented experience. 3. Certified by one of the following: a. AABC, Associated Air Balance Council: www.aabc.com/#sle; upon completion submit AABC National Performance Guaranty. b. NEBB, National Environmental Balancing Bureau: www.nebb.org. E. TAB Supervisor and Technician Qualifications: Certified by same organization as TAB agency. F. Instrumentation Calibration: Calibrate instruments at least every six months or more frequently if required by instrument manufacturer. 1. Keep an updated record of instrument calibration that indicates date of calibration and the name of party performing instrument calibration. 3.02 EXAMINATION A. Verify that systems are complete and operable before commencing work. Ensure the following conditions: 1. Systems are started and operating in a safe and normal condition. 2. Temperature control systems are installed complete and operable. 3. Proper thermal overload protection is in place for electrical equipment. 4. Final filters are clean and in place. If required, install temporary media in addition to final filters. 5. Duct systems are clean of debris. 6. Fans are rotating correctly. 7. Fire and volume dampers are in place and open. 8. Air coil fins are cleaned and combed. 9. Access doors are closed and duct end caps are in place. 10. Air outlets are installed and connected. 11. Duct system leakage is minimized. 12. Hydronic systems are flushed, filled, and vented. 13. Pumps are rotating correctly. 14. Proper strainer baskets are clean and in place. 15. Service and balance valves are open. B. Submit field reports. Report defects and deficiencies that will or could prevent proper system balance. C. Beginning of work means acceptance of existing conditions. 3.03 PREPARATION A. Hold a pre-balancing meeting at least one week prior to starting TAB work. 1. Require attendance by all installers whose work will be tested, adjusted, or balanced. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230593 -3  Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing for HVAC  B. Provide instruments required for testing, adjusting, and balancing operations. Make instruments available to Architect to facilitate spot checks during testing. C. Pre-construction air and water testing. 1. Measure pressure, temperature, and volume of air from existing base building system before starting work. Traverse main supply and return ducts before work to obtain total flow. Submit report to engineer immediately after completion of test. 2. Measure flowrate of water (chilled, glycol, hot, condenser water) and differential pressure across risers or mains to space to determine flowrate, entering and differential pressure being provided. 3.04 ADJUSTMENT TOLERANCES A. Air Handling Systems: Adjust to within plus or minus 5 percent of design for supply systems and plus or minus 10 percent of design for return and exhaust systems. B. Air Outlets and Inlets: Adjust total to within plus 10 percent and minus 5 percent of design to space. Adjust outlets and inlets in space to within plus or minus 10 percent of design. C. Hydronic Systems: Adjust to within plus or minus 10 percent of design. 3.05 RECORDING AND ADJUSTING A. Ensure recorded data represents actual measured or observed conditions. B. Permanently mark settings of valves, dampers, and other adjustment devices allowing settings to be restored. Set and lock memory stops. C. Mark on drawings the locations where traverse and other critical measurements were taken and cross reference the location in the final report. D. After adjustment, take measurements to verify balance has not been disrupted or that such disruption has been rectified. E. Leave systems in proper working order, replacing belt guards, closing access doors, closing doors to electrical switch boxes, and restoring thermostats to specified settings. 3.06 AIR SYSTEM PROCEDURE A. Adjust air handling and distribution systems to provide required or design supply, return, and exhaust air quantities at site altitude. B. Make air quantity measurements in ducts by Pitot tube traverse of entire cross sectional area of duct. C. Measure air quantities at air inlets and outlets. D. Adjust distribution system to obtain uniform space temperatures free from objectionable drafts and noise. E. Use volume control devices to regulate air quantities only to extend that adjustments do not create objectionable air motion or sound levels. Effect volume control by duct internal devices such as dampers and splitters. F. Vary total system air quantities by adjustment of fan speeds. Provide drive changes required. Vary branch air quantities by damper regulation. G. Provide system schematic with required and actual air quantities recorded at each outlet or inlet. H. Measure static air pressure conditions on air supply units, including filter and coil pressure drops, and total pressure across the fan. Make allowances for 50 percent loading of filters. I. Adjust outside air automatic dampers, outside air, return air, and exhaust dampers for design conditions. J. Measure temperature conditions across outside air, return air, and exhaust dampers to check leakage. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230593 -4  Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing for HVAC  K. Where modulating dampers are provided, take measurements and balance at extreme conditions. Balance variable volume systems at maximum air flow rate, full cooling, and at minimum air flow rate, full heating. L. Measure building static pressure and adjust supply, return, and exhaust air systems to provide required relationship between each to maintain approximately 0.05 inches positive static pressure near the building entries. M. On fan powered VAV boxes, adjust air flow switches for proper operation. N. Cut insulation, ducts, and equipment cabinets for installation of test probes to the minimum extent necessary to allow adequate performance of procedures. After testing and balancing, close probe holes and patch insulation with new materials identical to those removed. Restore vapor barrier and finish according to insulation Specifications for this Project. 3.07 WATER SYSTEM PROCEDURE A. Adjust water systems to provide required or design quantities. B. Use calibrated Venturi tubes, orifices, or other metered fittings and pressure gauges to determine flow rates for system balance. Where flow metering devices are not installed, base flow balance on temperature difference across various heat transfer elements in the system. C. Adjust systems to provide specified pressure drops and flows through heat transfer elements prior to thermal testing. Perform balancing by measurement of temperature differential in conjunction with air balancing. D. Effect system balance with automatic control valves fully open to heat transfer elements. E. Effect adjustment of water distribution systems by means of balancing cocks, valves, and fittings. Do not use service or shut-off valves for balancing unless indexed for balance point. F. Where available pump capacity is less than total flow requirements or individual system parts, full flow in one part may be simulated by temporary restriction of flow to other parts. G. Cut insulation, pipes, and equipment cabinets for installation of test probes to the minimum extent necessary to allow adequate performance of procedures. After testing and balancing, close probe holes and patch insulation with new materials identical to those removed. Restore vapor barrier and finish according to insulation Specifications for this Project. 3.08 PROCEDURES FOR CHILLERS / HEAT PUMP A. Balance water flow through each evaporator and condenser to within specified tolerances of indicated flow with all pumps operating. With only one chiller operating in a multiple chiller installation, do not exceed the flow for the maximum tube velocity recommended by the chiller manufacturer. Measure and record the minimum data to be reported with each chiller operating at design conditions.\ B. Heat Pumps which operate in heating and cooling mode to be tested in all modes of operation. 3.09 PROCEDURES FOR VIBRATION MEASUREMENTS A. Use a vibration meter meeting the following criteria: 1. Solid-state circuitry with a piezoelectric accelerometer. 2. Velocity range of 0.1 to 10 inches per second. 3. Displacement range of 1 to 100 mils. 4. Frequency range of at least 0 to 1000 Hz. 5. Capable of filtering unwanted frequencies. B. Calibrate the vibration meter before each day of testing. 1. Use a calibrator provided with the vibration meter. 2. Follow vibration meter and calibrator manufacturer's calibration procedures. C. Perform vibration measurements when other building and outdoor vibration sources are at a minimum level and will not influence measurements of equipment being tested. 1. Turn off equipment in the building that might interfere with testing. 2. Clear the space of people. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230593 -5  Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing for HVAC  D. Perform vibration measurements after air and water balancing and equipment testing is complete. E. Clean equipment surfaces in contact with the vibration transducer. F. Position the vibration transducer according to manufacturer's written instructions and to avoid interference with the operation of the equipment being tested. G. Measure and record vibration on rotating equipment over 3 hp. H. Measure and record equipment vibration, bearing vibration, equipment base vibration, and building structure vibration. Record velocity and displacement readings in the horizontal, vertical, and axial planes. 1. Fans and HVAC Equipment with Fans: a. Fan Bearing: Drive end and opposite end. b. Motor Bearing: Drive end and opposite end. c. Equipment Casing: Top and side. d. Equipment Base: Top and side. e. Building: Floor. f. Ductwork: To and from equipment after flexible connections. g. Piping: To and from equipment after flexible connections. 2. Chillers and HVAC Equipment with Compressors: a. Compressor Bearing: Drive end and opposite end. b. Motor Bearing: Drive end and opposite end. c. Equipment Casing: Top and side. d. Equipment Base: Top and side. e. Building: Floor. f. Piping: To and from equipment after flexible connections. I. For equipment with vibration isolation, take floor measurements with the vibration isolation blocked solid to the floor and with the vibration isolation floating. Calculate and report the differences. J. Inspect, measure, and record vibration isolation. 1. Verify that vibration isolation is installed in the required locations. 2. Verify that installation is level and plumb. 3. Verify that isolators are properly anchored. 4. For spring isolators, measure the compressed spring height, the spring OD, and the travel-to-solid distance. 5. Measure the operating clearance between each inertia base and the floor or concrete base below. Verify that there is unobstructed clearance between the bottom of the inertia base and the floor. 3.10 PROCEDURES FOR TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING EXISTING SYSTEMS A. Perform a preconstruction inspection of existing equipment that is to remain and be reused. 1. Measure and record the operating speed, airflow, and static pressure of each fan. 2. Measure motor voltage and amperage. Compare the values to motor nameplate information. 3. Check the refrigerant charge. 4. Check the condition of filters. 5. Check the condition of coils. 6. Check the operation of the drain pan and condensate drain trap. 7. Check bearings and other lubricated parts for proper lubrication. 8. Report on the operating condition of the equipment and the results of the measurements taken. Report deficiencies. B. Before performing testing and balancing of existing systems, inspect existing equipment that is to remain and be reused to verify that existing equipment has been cleaned and refurbished. 1. New filters are installed. 2. Coils are clean and fins combed. 3. Drain pans are clean. 4. Fans are clean. 5. Bearings and other parts are properly lubricated. 6. Deficiencies noted in the preconstruction report are corrected. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230593 -6  Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing for HVAC  C. Perform testing and balancing of existing systems to the extent that existing systems are affected by the renovation work. 1. Compare the indicated airflow of the renovated work to the measured fan airflows and determine the new fan, speed, filter, and coil face velocity. 2. Verify that the indicated airflows of the renovated work result in filter and coil face velocities and fan speeds that are within the acceptable limits defined by equipment manufacturer. 3. If calculations increase or decrease the airflow and water flow rates by more than 5 percent, make equipment adjustments to achieve the calculated airflow and water flow rates. If 5 percent or less, equipment adjustments are not required. 3.11 REUSE OF EXISTING EQUIPMENT A. Existing system survey 1. Prior to start of construction, contractor to perform existing conditions survey of systems to be reused and prepare complete report indicating physical condition of units and accessories and note any repairs required beyond items included in design documents to restore equipment to a fully operational condition. Report to be submitted to engineer for review and any corrective action. Coordinate this work with any new or refurbishment work listed in the specifications or plans. 2. Provide a unit price list to be submitted with your bid for the repair of all internal components of all equipment to be reused as well as all accessories. 3. Upon completion of the project, the contractor shall warranty all reused equipment for one (1) year. 3.12 INSPECTIONS A. Initial Inspection: 1. After testing and balancing are complete, operate each system and randomly check measurements to verify that the system is operating according to the final test and balance readings documented in the Final Report. 2. Randomly check the following for each system: a. Edit random checks to coincide with TAB tests specified. b. Measure airflow of at least 10 percent of air outlets. c. Measure water flow of at least 5 percent of terminals. d. Measure room temperature at each thermostat/temperature sensor. Compare the reading to the set point. e. Measure space pressure of at least 10 percent of locations. f. Verify that balancing devices are marked with final balance position. g. Note deviations to the Contract Documents in the Final Report. B. Final Inspection: 1. After initial inspection is complete and evidence by random checks verifies that testing and balancing are complete and accurately documented in the final report, request that a final inspection be made by Owner. 3.13 ADDITIONAL TESTS A. Within 90 days of completing TAB, perform additional testing and balancing to verify that balanced conditions are being maintained throughout and to correct unusual conditions. B. Seasonal Periods: If initial TAB procedures were not performed during near-peak summer and winter conditions, perform additional testing, inspecting, and adjusting during near-peak summer and winter conditions. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230593 -7  Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing for HVAC  END OF SECTION 230593 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230593 -8  Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing for HVAC  SECTION 230800 COMMISSIONING OF HVAC PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SUMMARY A. See Section 019113 -General Commissioning Requirements for overall objectives; comply with the requirements of Section 019113. B. This section covers the Contractor's responsibilities for commissioning; each subcontractor or installer responsible for the installation of a particular system or equipment item to be commissioned is responsible for the commissioning activities relating to that system or equipment item. C. The Commissioning Authority (CA) directs and coordinates all commissioning activities and provides Prefunctional Checklists and Functional Test Procedures for Contractor's use. D. The entire HVAC system is to be commissioned, including commissioning activities for the following specific items: 1. Control system. 2. Major and minor equipment items. 3. Piping systems and equipment. 4. Ductwork and accessories. 5. Terminal units. 6. Sound control devices. 7. Vibration control devices. 8. Variable frequency drives. 9. Other equipment and systems explicitly identified elsewhere in Contract Documents as requiring commissioning. E. The Prefunctional Checklist and Functional Test requirements specified in this section are in addition to, not a substitute for, inspection or testing specified in other sections. 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Section 230913 -Instrumentation and Control Devices for HVAC. B. Section 230993 -Sequence of Operations for HVAC Controls. C. Section 230593 -Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing for HVAC. 1.03 REFERENCE STANDARDS A. ASHRAE Guideline 1.1 -The HVAC&R Technical Requirements for the Commissioning Process; 2007, with Errata (2012). 1.04 SUBMITTALS A. Updated Submittals: Keep the Commissioning Authority informed of all changes to control system documentation made during programming and setup; revise and resubmit when substantial changes are made. B. DRAFT Prefunctional Checklists and Functional Test Procedures for Control System: Detailed written plan indicating the procedures to be followed to test, checkout and adjust the control system prior to full system Functional Testing; include at least the following for each type of equipment controlled: 1. System name. 2. List of devices. 3. Step-by-step procedures for testing each controller after installation, including: a. Process of verifying proper hardware and wiring installation. b. Process of downloading programs to local controllers and verifying that they are addressed correctly. c. Process of performing operational checks of each controlled component. d. Plan and process for calibrating valve and damper actuators and all sensors. e. Description of the expected field adjustments for transmitters, controllers and control actuators should control responses fall outside of expected values. 4. Copy of proposed log and field checkout sheets to be used to document the process; include space for initial and final read values during calibration of each point and space to specifically indicate when a sensor or controller has “passed” and is operating within the contract parameters. 5. Description of the instrumentation required for testing. 6. Indicate what tests on what systems should be completed prior to TAB using the control system for TAB work. Coordinate with the Commissioning Authority and TAB contractor for this determination. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230800 -1  Commissioning of HVAC  C. Startup Reports, Prefunctional Checklists, and Trend Logs: Submit for approval of Commissioning Authority. D. HVAC Control System O&M Manual Requirements. In addition to documentation specified elsewhere, compile and organize at minimum the following data on the control system: 1. Specific step-by-step instructions on how to perform and apply all functions, features, modes, etc. mentioned in the controls training sections of this specification and other features of this system. Provide an index and clear table of contents. Include the detailed technical manual for programming and customizing control loops and algorithms. 2. Full as-built set of control drawings. 3. Full as-built sequence of operations for each piece of equipment. 4. Full points list; in addition to the information on the original points list submittal, include a listing of all rooms with the following information for each room: a. Floor. b. Room number. c. Room name. d. Air handler unit ID. e. Reference drawing number. f. Air terminal unit tag ID. g. Heating and/or cooling valve tag ID. h. Minimum air flow rate. i. Maximum air flow rate. 5. Full print out of all schedules and set points after testing and acceptance of the system. 6. Full as-built print out of software program. 7. Electronic copy on disk of the entire program for this facility. 8. Marking of all system sensors and thermostats on the as-built floor plan and HVAC drawings with their control system designations. 9. Maintenance instructions, including sensor calibration requirements and methods by sensor type, etc. 10. Control equipment component submittals, parts lists, etc. 11. Warranty requirements. 12. Copies of all checkout tests and calibrations performed by the Contractor (not commissioning tests). 13. Organize and subdivide the manual with permanently labeled tabs for each of the following data in the given order: a. Sequences of operation. b. Control drawings. c. Points lists. d. Controller and/or module data. e. Thermostats and timers. f. Sensors and DP switches. g. Valves and valve actuators. h. Dampers and damper actuators. i. Program setups (software program printouts). 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230800 -2  Commissioning of HVAC  E. Project Record Documents: See Section 017800 for additional requirements. 1. Submit updated version of control system documentation, for inclusion with operation and maintenance data. 2. Show actual locations of all static and differential pressure sensors (air, water and building pressure) and air-flow stations on project record drawings. F. Draft Training Plan: In addition to requirements specified in Section 017900, include: 1. Follow the recommendations of ASHRAE Guideline 1.1. 2. Control system manufacturer's recommended training. 3. Demonstration and instruction on function and overrides of any local packaged controls not controlled by the HVAC control system. G. Training Manuals: See Section 017900 for additional requirements. 1. Provide three extra copies of the controls training manuals in a separate manual from the O&M manuals. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 TEST EQUIPMENT A. Provide all standard testing equipment required to perform startup and initial checkout and required functional performance testing; unless otherwise noted such testing equipment will NOT become the property of Owner. B. Equipment-Specific Tools: Where special testing equipment, tools and instruments are specific to a piece of equipment, are only available from the vendor, and are required in order to accomplish startup or Functional Testing, provide such equipment, tools, and instruments as part of the work at no extra cost to Owner; such equipment, tools, and instruments are to become the property of Owner. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 PREPARATION A. Cooperate with the Commissioning Authority in development of the Prefunctional Checklists and Functional Test Procedures. B. Furnish additional information requested by the Commissioning Authority. C. Prepare a preliminary schedule for HVAC pipe and duct system testing, flushing and cleaning, equipment start-up and testing, adjusting, and balancing start and completion for use by the Commissioning Authority; update the schedule as appropriate. D. Notify the Commissioning Authority when pipe and duct system testing, flushing, cleaning, startup of each piece of equipment and testing, adjusting, and balancing will occur; when commissioning activities not yet performed or not yet scheduled will delay construction notify ahead of time and be proactive in seeing that the Commissioning Authority has the scheduling information needed to efficiently execute the commissioning process. E. Put all HVAC equipment and systems into operation and continue operation during each working day of testing, adjusting, and balancing and commissioning, as required. F. Provide test holes in ducts and plenums where directed to allow air measurements and air balancing; close with an approved plug. G. Provide temperature and pressure taps in accordance with Contract Documents. 3.02 INSPECTING AND TESTING -GENERAL A. Submit startup plans, startup reports, and Prefunctional Checklists for each item of equipment or other assembly to be commissioned. B. Perform the Functional Tests directed by the Commissioning Authority for each item of equipment or other assembly to be commissioned. C. Provide two-way radios for use during the testing. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230800 -3  Commissioning of HVAC  D. Valve/Damper Stroke Setup and Check: 1. For all valve/damper actuator positions checked, verify the actual position against the control system readout. 2. Set pump/fan to normal operating mode. 3. Command valve/damper closed; visually verify that valve/damper is closed and adjust output zero signal as required. 4. Command valve/damper open; verify position is full open and adjust output signal as required. 5. Command valve/damper to a few intermediate positions. 6. If actual valve/damper position does not reasonably correspond, replace actuator or add pilot positioner (for pneumatics). E. Isolation Valve or System Valve Leak Check: For valves not by coils. 1. With full pressure in the system, command valve closed. 2. Use an ultra-sonic flow meter to detect flow or leakage. F. Deficiencies: Correct deficiencies and re-inspect or re-test, as applicable, at no extra cost to Owner. 3.03 TAB COORDINATION A. TAB: Testing, adjusting, and balancing of HVAC. B. Coordinate commissioning schedule with TAB schedule. C. Review the TAB plan to determine the capabilities of the control system toward completing TAB. D. Provide all necessary unique instruments and instruct the TAB technicians in their use; such as handheld control system interface for setting terminal unit boxes, etc. E. Have all required Prefunctional Checklists, calibrations, startup and component Functional Tests of the system completed and approved by the Commissioning Authority prior to starting TAB. F. Provide a qualified control system technician to operate the controls to assist the TAB technicians or provide sufficient training for the TAB technicians to operate the system without assistance. 3.04 CONTROL SYSTEM FUNCTIONAL TESTING A. Prefunctional Checklists for control system components will require a signed and dated certification that all system programming is complete as required to accomplish the requirements of Contract Documents and the detailed Sequences of Operation documentation submittal. B. Do not start Functional Testing until all controlled components have themselves been successfully Functionally Tested in accordance with Contract Documents. C. Using a skilled technician who is familiar with this building, execute the Functional Testing of the control system as required by the Commissioning Authority. D. Functional Testing of the control system constitutes demonstration and trend logging of control points monitored by the control system. 1. The scope of trend logging is partially specified; trend log up to 50 percent more points than specified at no extra cost to Owner. 2. Perform all trend logging specified in Prefunctional Checklists and Functional Test procedures. E. Functionally Test integral or stand-alone controls in conjunction with the Functional Tests of the equipment they are attached to, including any interlocks with other equipment or systems; further testing during control system Functional Test is not required unless specifically indicated below. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230800 -4  Commissioning of HVAC  F. Demonstrate the following to the Commissioning Authority during testing of controlled equipment; coordinate with commissioning of equipment. 1. Setpoint changing features and functions. 2. Sensor calibrations. G. Demonstrate to the Commissioning Authority: 1. That all specified functions and features are set up, debugged and fully operable. 2. That scheduling features are fully functional and setup, including holidays. 3. That all graphic screens and value readouts are completed. 4. Correct date and time setting in central computer. 5. That field panels read the same time as the central computer; sample 10 percent of field panels; if any of those fail, sample another 10 percent; if any of those fail test all remaining units at no extra cost to Owner. 6. Functionality of field panels using local operator keypads and local ports (plug-ins) using portable computer/keypad; demonstrate 100 percent of panels and 10 percent of ports; if any ports fail, sample another 10 percent; if any of those fail, test all remaining units at no extra cost to Owner. 7. Power failure and battery backup and power-up restart functions. 8. Global commands features. 9. Security and access codes. 10. Occupant over-rides (manual, telephone, key, keypad, etc.). 11. O&M schedules and alarms. 12. Occupancy sensors and controls. 13. All control strategies and sequences not tested during controlled equipment testing. H. If the control system, integral control components, or related equipment do not respond to changing conditions and parameters appropriately as expected, as specified and according to acceptable operating practice, under any of the conditions, sequences, or modes tested, correct all systems, equipment, components, and software required at no additional cost to Owner. 3.05 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE MANUALS A. See Section 017800 for additional requirements. B. Add design intent documentation furnished by Architect to manuals prior to submission to Owner. C. Submit manuals related to items that were commissioned to Commissioning Authority for review; make changes recommended by Commissioning Authority. D. Commissioning Authority will add commissioning records to manuals after submission to Owner. END OF SECTION 230800 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230800 -5  Commissioning of HVAC  SECTION 230993 SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Mechanical, Electrical, Plumbing and Fire Protection drawings B. General conditions C. Supplementary Conditions D. Division 1 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.02 SUMMARY A. This specification includes control sequences for HVAC systems and other supporting equipment as defined herein. 1.03 DEFINITIONS A. AHU: Air Handling Unit. B. AI: Analog Input. C. AO: Analog output. D. ATC: Automatic Temperature Control. E. BMS: Building Management System. F. CFM: Cubic Feet per Minute. G. DDC: Direct-digital controls. H. DI: Digital Input. I. DO: Digital Output. J. FAS: Fire Alarm System. K. HVAC: Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning. L. LAN: Local area network. M. LCD: Liquid Crystal Display N. MER: Mechanical Equipment Room. O. PID: Proportional Integral Derivative. P. POT: Portable Operators Terminal. Q. RAHU: Rooftop Air Handling Unit. R. VAV: Variable air volume. S. VFD: Variable Frequency Drive. 1.04 GENERAL A. All safety devices shall be hardwired to the starter and shall have a second contact for monitoring via the BMS. B. A failure alarm, as included in the point list, shall indicate the type of equipment that has failed (pump, fan, valve, etc.) including the specific designation of the piece of equipment (e.g., supply fan SF-1). It is not acceptable to generate a general failure alarm. C. All setpoints including setpoints internal to control algorithms shall be adjustable from all BMS operator interfaces. All commands shall be overrideable from all BMS operator interfaces. All control points shall be adjustable or overrideable from the same graphic page that displays the points. D. All points for a specific mechanical system shall be connected to and controlled by the same DDC controller unless otherwise specified. For example, it is not acceptable to control a supply fan with one (1) DDC controller located at a motor control center and to control the rest of the air-handling unit points with a DDC controller located at the air-handling unit. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230993 -1  SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS  E. All points required by the sequence of operation including, but not limited to, the points listed in the sequences of operation below, as well as all of the points’ associated values, shall be connected to the BMS and available to the BMS operators on all operator workstations and all operator interface devices as part of a graphical display that depicts the mechanical system controlled. F. No part of the programming specified herein shall be programmed into operator priority. G. All alarms associated with equipment that is disabled shall be inhibited. H. All initial field settings applied shall be saved as the default values. These values shall be downloaded to the controller such that they are the default value if the controller loses power. A printed copy shall also be provided to the owner as part of the O & M manuals. I. When the motor controller (or VFD) is equipped with an HOA, the motors shall only be controlled by the BMS when the HOA switch is in the auto position. J. The BMS shall monitor the runtime of each motor and display the total hours of operation on the associated BMS graphic. K. At any time a pump command does not equal a pump status, except immediately after startup, a pump failure alarm shall be generated on the BMS that notifies the BMS operator of the specific pump that has failed. L. The point lists are provided for convenience and are not intended to be all-inclusive. All points required to provide the Sequence of Operation shall be included as if listed. 1.05 COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS OF HISTORICAL DATA A. Provide trending capabilities that allow the user to easily monitor and preserve records of system activity over a minimum of eighteen (18) months. Any system point may be trended automatically at time-based intervals or changes of value, both of which shall be user-definable. Trend data shall be stored on hard disk for future diagnostics and reporting. B. Trend data report graphics shall be provided to allow the user to view all trended point data. Reports may be customized to include individual points or pre-defined groups of at least 6 points. Provide additional functionality to allow any trended data to be transferred directly to an off-the-shelf spreadsheet package such as Excel. This shall allow the user to perform custom calculations such as energy usage, equipment efficiency and energy costs and shall allow for generation of these reports on high-quality plots, graphs and charts. C. Provide additional functionality that allows the user to view trended data on trend graph displays. Displays shall be actual plots of both historical and/or real-time dynamic point data. A minimum of 10 points shall be viewed simultaneously on a single graph. The user may pause the graph and take "snapshots" of screens to be stored on the hard disk for future recall and analysis. Displays shall include an 'X' axis indicating elapsed time and a 'Y' axis indicating a range scale in engineering units for each point. The 'Y' axis shall have the ability to be manually or automatically scaled at the user's option. Different ranges for each point may be used with minimum and maximum values listed at the bottom and top of the 'Y' axis. All 'Y' axis data shall be color-coded to match the line color for the corresponding point. D. Static graphs shall represent actual point data that has been trended and stored on disk. Exact point values may be viewed on a data window by pointing or scrolling to the place of interest along the graph. Provide capability to print any graph on the system printer for use as a building management and diagnostics tool. E. Dynamic graphs shall represent real-time point data. Any point or group of points may be graphed, regardless of whether they have been predefined for trending. The graphs shall continuously update point values. At any time the user may redefine sampling times or range scales for any point. In addition, the user may pause the graph and take "snapshots" of screens to be stored on the workstation disk for future recall and analysis. As with static graphs, exact point values may be viewed and the graphs may be printed. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230993 -2  SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS  1.06 AUTOMATIC STAGGERED START AFTER A POWER FAILURE A. The BMS contractor shall submit an automatic restart sequence of operation that prioritizes the loads to be restarted, in order of importance, when a changeover in power occurs, either from normal power to emergency power or from emergency power to normal power and when there is more than one (1) piece of mechanical equipment to start at the same time (e.g., at the beginning of a normally scheduled occupied cycle). The automatic restart sequence of operation shall also show the time delays between the startup of each piece of mechanical equipment. B. Simultaneous starting of motors shall be prevented by a sequential start program in the BMS system. This program shall also provide sequential restart after power failure of motors that were running prior to power failure. C. Software time delay relays shall be provided in the BMS to allow fan motors to cool down before restarting. Motors shall have both a minimum interval time (between consecutive starts) and a minimum off time (between stop and start). 1.07 VARIABLE FREQUENCY DRIVE (VFD) INTEGRATION A. The BMS Contractor shall provide and wire a communication interface to each VFD via BACnet to monitor all points available via the interface. The BMS contractor shall provide all required interconnecting control wiring to interface all variable frequency drives to the BMS. The integration is in addition to the hardwired points listed in the points list for each system. VFD integration shall be provided whether it is listed in the individual sequence of operation of not. B. In addition to the communication interface, all VFD shall be provided with the following points hardwired to the BMS: 1. AI – VFD speed feedback (0-100%). 2. AO – VFD speed control (0-100%). 3. DI – VFD common alarm. 4. DI – VFD status (via current sensing relay, monitoring VFD status is not acceptable). 5. DO – VFD command (on/off). C. Provide the following points on the associated equipment graphic in addition to the hardwired points indicated above: 1. VFD failure. 1.08 GENERAL STRATEGIES A. Optimized Start 1. The optimized start/stop programs shall be accomplished by monitoring outdoor temperature, individual or average space temperature and historical data of building recovery time. The program shall automatically evaluate the thermal inertia of the structure, the capacity of the HVAC system to either increase or reduce space temperatures and indoor and outdoor conditions to determine the minimum time of HVAC system operation needed to satisfy the space environmental requirements at the start of the occupied cycle. The program shall monitor the controlled equipment status, where provided, to verify that the start command was carried out, and provide an alarm when the equipment does not start, fails, or is locally overridden. 2. The central heat pump plant shall perform optimized start in response to its own program to provide chilled/hot water to the building or in response to any building HVAC system calling for cooling/heating. 1.09 TIE-IN TO EXISTING BMS A. Provide a SEAMLESS tie-in to the existing BMS that was provided as part of the Plaza Building BMS upgrade project (AKF project #240454). The tie-in shall include Direct Digital Control (DDC), historical data collection, archiving and alarm, energy and information management for all control points specified herein. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230993 -3  SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS  B. Tie-in to existing site BMS of all DDC equipment and points as specified in this section and as required in all other referenced sections and as required to complete the sequences of operation outlined herein. Tie-in shall be made via an extension of the existing BMS. C. Provide new color graphics for all new systems specified in this contract. D. Revisions to all existing BMS workstations as required to incorporate the additional control components provided under this section. Revisions shall include, but are not limited to, revised graphics, update of additional firmware and/or software as required to accommodate new points. 1.10 OUTSIDE AIR STATION A. The BMS shall utilize the existing outside air temperature and humidity monitoring station via the BMS network. 1.11 PRIMARY DUAL TEMPERATURE WATER SYSTEM A. General 1. The primary dual temperature water system consists of the following mechanical equipment shared between the primary chilled water system and the primary hot water system: a. Seven (7) 2-pipe air source heat pumps (HP-9R-1 through HP-9R-7). HP-9R-1 through HP-9R-5 each feature a single bank with four (4) modules. HP-9R-6 and HP.9R-7 each feature a single bank with five (5) modules. The air source heat pumps shall be provided with packaged controls. The BMS shall be responsible for staging on each air source heat pump as necessary. b. Three (3) dual temperature water pumps (DTGP-2B-1 through DTGP-2B-3). The pumps shall operate in lead/lag/standby configuration. c. The dual temperature water system serves three (3) heat exchangers (PFHX-B3-1 thru PFHX-B3-3). PFHX-B3-1 serves the primary chilled water system and PFHX-B3.2 serves the primary hot water system. PFHX-B3-3 is a standby heat exchanger for redundancy that serves either the chilled water system or hot water system. 2. On the primary chilled water system, there are three (3) new chilled water pumps with VFDs (CHWP-B2-1 through CHWP-B3-3). The pumps shall operate in lead/lag/standby configuration. 3. On the hot water system, there are three (3) new primary hot water recirculation pumps (HWP-B3-1 through HWP-B3-3), four (4) water source heat pumps (HP-3B-1 through HP.3B-4), one (1) future water source heat pump (HP-3B-5), and three (3) secondary hot water distribution pumps (HWP-3B-4 through HWP-3B-6). The pumps shall operate in lead/lag/standby configuration. The water source heat pumps shall be provided with packaged controls. The BMS shall be responsible for staging on each water source heat pump as necessary. B. The BMS contractor shall: 1. Provide a primary controller for the dual temperature water plant and a primary controller for the chilled/hot water system. 2. Provide a communication interface to each air source heat pump’s packaged controls. The BMS shall monitor all points available via the interface. Coordinate with the unit manufacturer for listing of available points. This shall include but not be limited to new wiring and electrical conduit, etc. 3. Provide a communication interface to each water source heat pump’s packaged controls. The BMS shall monitor all points available via the interface. Coordinate with the unit manufacturer for listing of available points. This shall include but not be limited to new wiring and electrical conduit, etc. 4. Provide a communication interface to each pump’s VFD. The BMS shall monitor all points available via the interface. Coordinate with the unit manufacturer for listing of available points. This shall include but not be limited to new wiring and electrical conduit, etc. 5. Furnish, mount, and wire an electromagnetic flow/BTU meter each for the primary dual temperature water system, chilled water system, and hot water system. 6. Furnish, install, and wire dual temperature water supply and return temperature sensors on the common piping and for each air source heat pump. 7. Furnish, install, and wire chilled water supply and return temperature sensors. 8. Furnish, install, and wire primary and secondary hot water supply and return temperature sensors on the common piping and for each water source heat pump. 9. Furnish and wire isolation valves on the secondary side of each heat exchanger. 10. Furnish and wire isolation valves on the chilled water and hot water piping for each water source heat pump (total of four (4) isolation valves per water source heat pump). 11. Furnish and wire flow control modulating V-port ball control valves for the dual temperature water return of each air source heat pump and each heat exchanger. 12. Furnish and wire flow control modulating V-port ball control valves for the evaporator piping and condenser piping of each water source heat pump. 13. Furnish and wire differential pressure bypass valves for the dual temperature water system, chilled water system, primary hot water system, and secondary hot water system. 14. Furnish and wire a minimum flow bypass valve for the air source heat pumps on the dual temperature water system. 15. Furnish and wire all control valves and isolation valves described in this section and shown on the mechanical drawings. 16. Furnish, install, and wire new differential pressure sensors across the dual temperature water piping of each air source heat pump bank. 17. Furnish, install, and wire new differential pressure sensors across the evaporator piping and condenser piping of each water source heat pump. 18. Furnish, install, and wire new differential pressure sensors for the chilled water riser and hot water riser located 2/3 downstream of each riser. 19. Furnish, install, and wire a pressure switch for each expansion tank to monitor high pressure alarm. 20. Furnish all field wiring required for air source heat pump and water source heat pump operation, including but not limited to, flow switch interlock wiring. 21. Furnish, install, and wire any additional components as required to achieve a completely operational system. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230993 -4  SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS  C. Air Source Heat Pump and Water Source Heat Pump Staging & Operation 1. The air source heat pumps shall operate in either cooling only mode (summer operation) or heating only mode (winter operation). The chilled water heat exchanger (PFHX-B3-1) shall be utilized during cooling mode. The hot water heat exchanger (PFHX-B3-2) shall be utilized during heating mode. During winter operation, the water source heat pumps shall operate in heating mode 2. The water source heat pumps shall be capable of operating in simultaneous heating and cooling mode when there is a simultaneous call for cooling and heating (swing season). The chilled water heat exchanger (PFHX-B3-1) and hot water heat exchanger (PFHX-B3.2) shall be disabled during simultaneous heating and cooling mode. D. Modes of Operation 1. The system shall operate in summer mode when the outside temperature rises above 65ºF (adj.), based on calendar date (April through September) or via a manual command. a. The lead air source heat pump shall be indexed on. The air source heat pump shall operate in cooling mode and be controlled to maintain the dual temperature water supply cooling setpoint. If the lead air source heat pump is not able to maintain the dual temperature water cooling load, the second air source heat pump shall stage on in cooling mode. Additional air source heat pumps shall be staged in a similar fashion. 2. The system shall operate in winter mode whenever the outside temperature falls below 55ºF (adj.), based on calendar date (October through March) or via a manual command. a. The lead air source heat pump shall be indexed on. The air source heat pump shall operate in heating mode and be controlled to maintain the dual temperature water supply heating setpoint. If the lead air source heat pump is not able to maintain the dual temperature water heating load, the second air source heat pump shall stage on in heating mode. Additional air source heat pumps shall be staged in a similar fashion. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230993 -5  SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS  b. The water source heat pump shall be indexed on and be controlled to maintain hot water supply temperature setpoint. If the lead water source heat pump is not able to maintain the hot water load, the second water source heat pump shall stage on in heating mode. Additional water source heat pumps shall stage on in a similar fashion. 3. The system shall operate in simultaneous heating and cooling mode when outside temperature is between 55°F (adj.) and 65°F (adj.), based on a simultaneous call for cooling and heating, or via a manual command. a. The lead water source heat pump shall be indexed on. The water source heat pump shall operate in simultaneous heating and cooling mode and be controlled to maintain the secondary hot water supply temperature setpoint (adj.). If the lead water source heat pump is not able to maintain the hot water load, the second water source heat pump shall stage on in heating mode. Additional water source heat pumps shall stage on in a similar fashion. E. Summer Mode: 1. The air source heat pump shall operate in cooling mode in this mode. Upon a command to enable the lead air source heat pump, the dual temperature water flow control valve shall open (100% open for one (1) heat pump operation). The other air source heat pumps' control valves shall remain closed. 2. The flow control valve at the chilled water system heat exchanger (PFHX-B3-1) shall open 100% at startup. The chilled water isolation valve on the chilled water system shall open. The flow control valve at the hot water system heat exchanger (PFHX-B3-2) shall remain closed. The hot water system and the hot water pumps shall remain disabled. 3. When all control valves mentioned above have been proven to be in their appropriate positions (open or closed as sensed by the valve position feedbacks) and all isolation valve has been proven to be in their appropriate positions (open or closed via valve end switches), the BMS shall energize the lead dual temperature water pump and the lead chilled water pump. The BMS operator shall have the option to disable the automatic start/stop of the pumps from the BMS graphics such that the BMS operator must manually enable/disable the pumps. 4. When the pumps are on, as determined by current sensing relays, the BMS shall enable the lead air source heat pump in cooling mode. The packaged heat pump controls shall stage its modules as necessary to maintain the dual temperature water supply cooling temperature setpoint of 40°F (adj.). The BMS shall have the capability of adjusting the dual temperature water supply cooling temperature setpoint via interlock to the packaged heat pump control panel. Coordinate with heat pump manufacturer for all requirements. 5. The chilled water system heat exchanger's control valve shall modulate as necessary to maintain the chilled water supply temperature setpoint of 42°F (adj.). 6. The dual temperature water pump VFD and chilled water pump VFD shall modulate as necessary to maintain their respective differential pressure setpoint (adj.).  Refer to “Dual Temperature Water Pump Control” and “Chilled Water Pump Control” below for more details. 7. The BMS shall monitor the dual temperature system energy meter (BTU) and calculate average tonnage. The BMS shall incorporate a control algorithm which will calculate the average tonnage of the previous 5 minutes (adj.) to avoid spike in the data. The averaging duration shall be sliding. That is, the DDC control shall continue to calculate the latest five (5) minutes average at any given time. The old data shall be pushed out and not be used in the average calculation if the data is more than 5 minutes old (a continuous sliding 5 minutes window). 8. If the dual temperature water supply temperature rises above setpoint for a period greater than 15 minutes (adj.) or if the lead air source heat pump is enabled and the load (BTU) exceeds 90% (adj.) of the capacity of the enabled air source heat pump(s) for 10 minutes (adj.), the BMS shall enable the second air source heat pump in cooling mode. Upon a command to enable the second air source heat pump, the second air source heat pump’s dual temperature water flow control valve shall modulate open. The dual temperature water flow control valves at each air source heat pump shall modulate to maintain equal flow through each active heat pump. Refer to "Flow Control V-port Ball Valve Control" below for details. The BMS shall start the second air source heat pump in cooling mode. The second air source heat pump shall be controlled to maintain the dual temperature water supply cooling temperature setpoint. 9. Additional air source heat pumps shall be staged on in a similar fashion as described above upon a further rise in dual temperature water supply temperature or dual temperature water load. 10. If two or more air source heat pumps are enabled and the dual temperature water load (BTU) drops to a point where one less air source heat pump can handle the required cooling load for a period of 15 minutes (adj.), the air source heat pump bank with the highest runtime hours shall be disabled. Upon a command to disable an air source heat pump bank, the air source heat pump bank’s flow control valves shall close. 11. An internal timer shall be initiated whenever an air source heat pump is staged on or off. The DDC controller shall not compare the dual temperature water cooling load or staging any other air source heat pump before the timer expired. This timer shall prevent short cycling of heat pumps (constantly staging heat pump on and off). 12. The BMS shall have the capability of resetting the dual temperature water supply heating temperature setpoint via hardwire interlock to the packaged air source heat pump control panel. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230993 -6  SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS  F. Winter Mode 1. The air source heat pumps shall operate in heating mode in this mode. Upon a command to enable the lead air source heat pump, the dual temperature water flow control valve shall open (100% open for one (1) heat pump operation). The other air source heat pumps' control valves shall remain closed. 2. The flow control valve at the hot water system heat exchanger (PFHX-B3-2) shall open 100% at startup. The hot water isolation valve on the hot water system shall open. The flow control valve at the chilled water system heat exchanger (PFHX-B3-1) shall remain closed. The hot water isolation valves associated with the lead water source heat pump shall open and the associated chilled water isolation valves shall be closed. The chilled water system and the chilled water pumps shall remain disabled. 3. When all control valves mentioned above have been proven to be in their appropriate positions (open or closed as sensed by the valve position feedbacks) and all isolation valve has been proven to be in their appropriate positions (open or closed via valve end switches), the BMS shall energize the lead dual temperature water pump. The BMS operator shall have the option to disable the automatic start/stop of the pumps from the BMS graphics such that the BMS operator must manually enable/disable the pumps. 4. When the pumps are on, as determined by current sensing relays, the BMS shall enable the lead air source heat pump in heating mode. The packaged heat pump controls shall stage its modules as necessary to maintain the dual temperature water supply heating temperature setpoint of 102°F (adj.). The BMS shall have the capability of adjusting the dual temperature water supply heating temperature setpoint via interlock to the packaged heat pump control panel. Coordinate with heat pump manufacturer for all requirements. 5. The hot water system heat exchanger's flow control valve shall modulate as necessary to maintain the primary hot water supply temperature setpoint of 100°F (adj.). 6. The dual temperature water pump VFD shall modulate as necessary to maintain system differential pressure setpoint.  Refer to “Dual Temperature Water Pump Control” below for more details. 7. If the dual temperature water supply temperature falls below setpoint for a period greater than 15 minutes (adj.) or if the lead air source heat pump is enabled and the load (BTU) exceeds 90% (adj.) of the capacity of the enabled air source heat pump(s) for 10 minutes (adj.), the BMS shall enable the second air source heat pump in heating mode. Upon a command to enable the second air source heat pump, the second air source heat pump’s dual temperature water flow control valve shall modulate open. The dual temperature water flow control valves at each air source heat pump shall modulate to maintain equal flow through each active heat pump. Refer to "Flow Control V-port Ball Valve Control" below for details. The BMS shall start the second air source heat pump in heating mode. The second air source heat pump shall be controlled to maintain the dual temperature water supply heating temperature setpoint. 8. Additional air source heat pumps shall be staged on in a similar fashion as described above upon a further fall in dual temperature water supply temperature or rise in dual temperature water load. If two or more air source heat pumps are enabled and the dual temperature water load (BTU) drops to a point where one less air source heat pump can handle the required heating load for a period of 15 minutes (adj.), the air source heat pump bank with the highest runtime hours shall be disabled. Upon a command to disable an air source heat pump bank, the air source heat pump bank’s flow control valves shall close. 9. An internal timer shall be initiated whenever an air source heat pump is staged on or off. The DDC controller shall not compare the dual temperature water heating load or staging any other air source heat pump before the timer expired. This timer shall prevent short cycling of heat pumps (constantly staging heat pump on and off). 10. The BMS shall have the capability of resetting the dual temperature water supply heating temperature setpoint via hardwire interlock to the packaged air source heat pump control panel. 11. Water Source Heat Pump Control a. The water source heat pump shall operate in heating mode in winter mode. Upon a command to enable the lead water source heat pump, the hot water flow control valves on the evaporator side and on the condenser side shall open (100% open for one (1) heat pump operation). The associated hot water isolation valves shall open and the associated chilled water isolation valves shall close. The other water source heat pumps' flow control valves shall remain closed. b. The primary hot water pump VFD (HWP-B3-1 through HWP-B3-3) shall modulate as necessary to maintain the system differential pressure setpoint (adj.). Refer to "Primary Hot Water Pump Control" below for more details. c. The packaged water source heat pump controls shall stage its modules as necessary to maintain the secondary hot water supply temperature setpoint of 180°F (adj.). The BMS shall have the capability of adjusting the secondary hot water supply temperature setpoint via interlock to the packaged water source heat pump control panel. Coordinate with heat pump manufacturer for all requirements. d. The secondary hot water pump VFD (HWP-B3-4 through HWP-B3-6) shall modulate as necessary to maintain system differential pressure setpoint (adj.). Refer to "Secondary Hot Water Pump Control” below for more details. e. The BMS shall monitor the hot water temperature system energy meter (BTU) and calculate average tonnage. The BMS shall incorporate a control algorithm which will calculate the average tonnage of the previous 5 minutes (adj.) to avoid spike in the data. The averaging duration shall be sliding. That is, the DDC control shall continue to calculate the latest five (5) minutes average at any given time. The old data shall be pushed out and not be used in the average calculation if the data is more than 5 minutes old (a continuous sliding 5 minutes window). f. If the secondary hot water supply temperature falls below setpoint for a period greater than 15 minutes (adj.) or if the lead water source heat pump is enabled and the load (BTU) exceeds 90% (adj.) of the capacity of the enabled water source heat pump(s) for 10 minutes (adj.), the BMS shall enable the second water source heat pump in heating mode. Upon a command to enable the second water source heat pump, the second water source heat pump’s hot water flow control valves shall modulate open. The hot water flow control valves at each water source heat pump shall modulate to maintain equal flow through each active heat pump. Refer to "Flow Control V-port Ball Valve Control" below for details. The BMS shall start the second water source heat 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230993 -7  SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS  58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230993 -8  SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS  pump in heating mode. The second water source heat pump shall be controlled to maintain the secondary hot water supply temperature setpoint. g. Additional water source heat pumps shall be staged on in a similar fashion as described above upon a further fall in secondary hot water supply temperature or rise in hot water load. If two or more water source heat pumps are enabled and the hot water load (BTU) drops to a point where one less water source heat pump can handle the required heating load for a period of 15 minutes (adj.), the water source heat pump bank with the highest runtime hours shall be disabled. Upon a command to disable a water source heat pump bank, the water source heat pump bank’s flow control valves shall close. h. An internal timer shall be initiated whenever a water source heat pump is staged on or off. The DDC controller shall not compare the hot water heating load or staging any other water source heat pump before the timer expired. This timer shall prevent short cycling of heat pumps (constantly staging heat pump on and off). i. The BMS shall have the capability of resetting the secondary hot water supply heating temperature setpoint via hardwire interlock to the packaged water source heat pump control panel. G. Simultaneous Heating and Cooling (Swing Season Operation) 1. The water source heat pumps shall operate in simultaneous heating and cooling mode in this mode. The air source heat pumps and the heat exchangers shall be disabled. The primary hot water pumps shall be disabled. 2. Upon a command to enable the lead water source heat pump, the hot water flow control valves on the evaporator side and on the condenser side shall open (100% open for one (1) heat pump operation). The associated hot water isolation valves shall close and the associated chilled water isolation valves shall open. The other water source heat pumps' flow control valves shall remain closed. 3. The chilled water pump VFDs and secondary hot water pump VFDs shall modulate as necessary to maintain their respective system differential pressure setpoints (adj.). Refer to “Chilled Water Pump Control” and "Secondary Hot Water Pump Control" below for more details. 4. The packaged water source heat pump controls shall stage its modules as necessary to maintain the secondary hot water supply temperature setpoint of 180°F (adj.) while simultaneously producing chilled water on its evaporator side. 5. Additional water source heat pumps shall be staged on as necessary as described above in winter mode. H. Flow Control V-Port Ball Valve Control 1. Each air source heat pump shall feature a flow control valve at their entering dual temperature water line. In addition to this, each air source heat pump shall feature a differential pressure sensor across the dual temperature water supply and return piping to monitor the water flow through each individual machine. When one heat pump is running, the associated flow control valve shall open 100%. When multiple heat pump banks are running, the BMS shall modulate the flow control valve located at each active heat pump bank to maintain equal flow (as sensed by the differential pressure sensor) through each active heat pump bank, by dividing the total water flow (as sensed by the flow meter) over the number of active heat pump banks. Due to the difference in flow capacity of different individual heat pumps, equal flow for a particular active heat pump shall be determined as a proportion between the flow capacity of that particular active heat pump and the total flow capacity of all active heat pumps. If the water flow through an operating heat pump falls below the minimum flow required for the heat pump bank to operate, the pump VFD shall be overridden as necessary to maintain the heat pump bank's minimum flow. 2. Each water source heat pump shall feature a flow control valve at their entering evaporator and at their condenser water lines. In addition to this, each water source heat pump shall feature a differential pressure sensor across the evaporator water entering and leaving lines and another differential pressure sensor across their condenser water entering and leaving lines to monitor the water flow through each machine. When one heat pump is running, the associated flow control valve shall open 100%. When multiple heat pump banks are running, the BMS shall modulate the flow control valve located at each active heat pump bank to maintain equal flow (as sensed by the differential pressure sensor) through each active heat pump bank, by dividing the total water flow (as sensed by the flow meter) over the number of active heat pump banks. If the water flow through an operating heat pump falls below the minimum flow required for the heat pump bank to operate, the pump VFD shall be overridden as necessary to maintain the heat pump bank's minimum flow. 3. The heat pump bank’s flow control valves shall be configured to slowly open and close such that the staging of an additional heat pump bank does not affect the flow requirements of the heat pump banks that are enabled. 4. The BMS contractor shall coordinate with the heat pump manufacturer for the minimum flow requirement of each heat pump. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230993 -9  SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS  I. Air Source Heat Pump Minimum Flow Bypass Valve Control 1. If the differential pressure across an active air source heat pump's condenser/evaporator falls below minimum differential pressure setpoint (adj.) as required for the active heat pump to operate, the minimum flow bypass valve shall modulate as necessary to maintain the minimum differential pressure setpoint (adj.). Coordinate minimum flow requirements for the air source heat pumps with the unit manufacturer. J. Dual Temperature Water Pump Control 1. The BMS shall modulate the dual temperature water pump VFDs to maintain the differential pressure setpoint (adj.) as sensed by the differential pressure sensor. 2. When lead and lag pumps are operating, the lead and lag pumps shall modulate in unison with one another. The lead and lag pumps shall operate at the same speed as one another when multiple pumps are enabled. The pump variable frequency drive control algorithm shall be enabled whenever the associated pumps are enabled. The VFDs shall start unloaded and slowly ramp up to speed as required. There shall always be at least one (1) inactive pump acting as the standby pump. 3. If the lead and lag pumps are operating at their minimum flow and the system differential pressure is above the differential pressure setpoint, the lag pump shall be commanded off and only the lead pump shall be allowed to modulate to maintain the differential pressure setpoint. The lead primary pump shall be the pump with the lowest runtime hours. 4. If the lead pump is operating at its minimum flow and the system differential pressure continues to rise above the differential pressure setpoint, the minimum flow bypass valve shall be allowed to open and modulate to meet the system differential pressure setpoint. 5. If the system differential pressure falls below the system differential pressure setpoint, the reverse of the above described process shall occur. K. Chilled Water Pump Control 1. The BMS shall modulate the primary chilled water pump VFDs to maintain the differential pressure setpoint (adj.) as sensed by the differential pressure sensor. 2. When lead and lag pumps are operating, the lead and lag pumps shall be enabled by default and shall modulate in unison with one another. The lead and lag pumps shall operate at the same speed as one another when multiple pumps are enabled. The pump variable frequency drive control algorithm shall be enabled whenever the associated pumps are enabled. The VFDs shall start unloaded and slowly ramp up to speed as required. There shall always be at least one (1) inactive pump acting as the standby pump. 3. If the lead and lag pumps are operating at their minimum flow and the system differential pressure is above the differential pressure setpoint, the lag pump shall be commanded off and only the lead pump shall be allowed to modulate to maintain the differential pressure setpoint. The lead primary pump shall be the pump with the lowest runtime hours. 4. If the lead pump is operating at its minimum flow and the system differential pressure continues to rise above the differential pressure setpoint, the differential pressure bypass valve shall be allowed to open and modulate to meet the system differential pressure setpoint. 5. If the system differential pressure falls below the system differential pressure setpoint, the reverse of the above described process shall occur. 6. The lead primary pump shall not be allowed to operate below the manufacturer recommended minimum flow required for the active heat pump to operate. The DDC controller shall be setup with minimum operating speed for the primary pumps set initially at 50% (adj.). The actual minimum speed setting shall be verified by the water balancer during water balancing. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230993 -10  SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS  L. Primary Hot Water Pump Control 1. The lead primary hot water pump shall be enabled when the lead water source heat pump is enabled in winter mode. 2. One (1) primary hot water pump shall each serve two water source heat pumps. Only the lead pump shall be enabled when one (1) or two (2) water source heat pumps are active. Both the lead and lag pumps shall be enabled when three (3) or four (4) water source heat pumps are active. 3. The BMS shall modulate the primary hot water pump VFDs as necessary to maintain the primary hot water system differential pressure setpoint (adj.). 4. If the lead pump is operating at its minimum flow, the lag pump is disabled, and the system differential pressure continues rise above the differential pressure setpoint, the diffebypass valve shall be allowed to open and modulate to meet the system differential pressure setpoint. 5. The lead primary pump shall not be allowed to operate below the manufacturer recommended minimum flow required for the active heat pump to operate. The DDC controller shall be setup with minimum operating speed for the pumps set initially at 50% (adj.). The actual minimum speed setting shall be verified by the water balancer during water balancing. M. Secondary Hot Water Pump Control 1. The BMS shall modulate the secondary hot water pump VFDs to maintain the differential pressure setpoint (adj.) as sensed by the differential pressure sensor. 2. When lead and lag pumps are operating, the lead and lag pumps shall modulate in unison with one another. The lead and lag pumps shall operate at the same speed as one another when multiple pumps are enabled. The pump variable frequency drive control algorithm shall be enabled whenever the associated pumps are enabled. The VFDs shall start unloaded and slowly ramp up to speed as required. There shall always be at least one (1) inactive pump acting as the standby pump. 3. If the lead and lag pumps are operating at their minimum flow and the system differential pressure is above the differential pressure setpoint, the lag pump shall be commanded off and only the lead pump shall be allowed to modulate to maintain the differential pressure setpoint. 4. If the lead pump is operating at its minimum flow and the system differential pressure continues to rise above the differential pressure setpoint, the differential pressure bypass valve shall be allowed to open and modulate to meet the system differential pressure setpoint. 5. If the system differential pressure falls below the system differential pressure setpoint, the reverse of the above described process shall occur. 6. The lead secondary pumps shall not be allowed to operate below the manufacturer recommended minimum flow required for the active heat pump to operate. The DDC controller shall be setup with minimum operating speed for the pumps set initially at 50% (adj.). The actual minimum speed setting shall be verified by the water balancer during water balancing. N. Air Source and Water Source Heat Pump Failure and Priority 1. At any time a heat pump command does not equal a heat pump status or common alarm is activated, a heat pump failure alarm shall be generated on the BMS that notifies the BMS operator of the specific heat pump that has failed, and that heat pump shall be commanded off. The BMS shall wait 30 seconds (adj.) to see the heat pump bank status change to match the heat pump bank command before indicating a heat pump bank failure alarm. An automatic lead/lag program shall start the next available heat pump with the lowest runtime hours in sequence in the event of a heat pump bank failure. 2. For the air source heat pumps, the lead heat pump shall be the heat pump with the lowest runtime hours. The second heat pump shall be the heat pump with the second lowest runtime hours. The third heat pump shall be the heat pump with the third lowest runtime hours. The other heat pumps shall be indexed in a similar fashion. The individual heat pump prioritiy shall be indexed on a weekly basis at a minimum. The BMS operators shall have the ability to override each heat pump priority level. 3. For the water source heat pumps, the lead heat pump shall be the heat pump with the lowest runtime hours. The second heat pump shall be the heat pump with the second lowest runtime hours. The third heat pump shall be the heat pump with the third lowest runtime hours. The fourth eat pump shall be the heat pump with the highest runtime hours. The individual heat pump prioritiy shall be indexed on a weekly basis at a minimum. The BMS operators shall have the ability to override each heat pump priority level. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230993 -11  SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS  O. Heat Exchanger Failure 1. At any time a heat exchanger valve command does equal a valve position feedback or endswitch status, a heat exchanger failure alarm shall be generated on the BMS that notifies the BMS operator of the specific heat exchanger that has failed, and that heat exchanger shall be commanded off. The BMS shall wait 30 seconds to see the heat exchanger valve position feedback change to match the heat exchanger command before indicating a heat exchanger failure alarm. An automatic lead/standby program shall start the next available heat exchanger in sequence in the event of a heat exchanger failure. 2. In the event of a heat exchanger failure, the BMS operator shall be notified to manually open the standby heat exchanger's (PFHX-B3-3) associated isolation valves to serve either the chilled water or hot water system as necessary. The standby heat exchanger's flow control valve shall modulate as necessary to maintain the chilled water or hot water supply temperature setpoint. The control valves associated with the failed heat exchanger shall be closed. P. Pump Failure and Priority 1. At any time a pump command does not equal a pump status, except immediately after startup, a pump failure alarm shall be generated on the BMS that notifies the BMS operator of the specific pump that has failed, and that pump shall be commanded off. The BMS shall wait 30 seconds to see the pump status change before indicating a pump failure alarm. An automatic lead/lag/standby program shall start the next available pump in sequence in the event of a pump failure. 2. The lead pump shall be the pump with the lowest runtime hours. The lag pump shall be the pump with the second lowest runtime hours. The standby pump shall be the pump with the highest runtime hours. The lead, lag, and standby pumps shall be indexed on a weekly basis at a minimum. The BMS operators shall have the ability to override each pump’s priority level. 3. During rotation, the standby pump VFD shall start unloaded and slowly ramp up to speed. The lead pump shall ramp down as the standby pump VFD speeds up while maintaining setpoint. When the lead pump is operating at minimum speed, the lead pump shall stop. The BMS shall index the standby pump to be the new lead pump. Q. Provide the following points hardwired to the BMS: 1. All points available via a BACnet interface to each air source heat pump controller 2. All points available via a BACnet interface to each water source heat pump controller 3. All points available via a BACnet interface to each VFD 4. All points available via a BACnet interface to each BTU meter 5. AI – Air source heat pump differential pressure (one (1) per heat pump) 6. AI – Air source heat pump dual temperature water return temperature (one (1) per heat pump) 7. AI – Air source heat pump dual temperature water supply temperature (one (1) per heat pump) 8. AI – Air source heat pump flow control valve position feedback (0-100%; one (1) per heat pump) 9. AI – Chilled water pump VFD speed feedback (0-100%; one (1) per pump) 10. AI – Chilled water system BTU 11. AI – Chilled water system differential pressure 12. AI – Chilled water system flow 13. AI – Common chilled water return temperature 14. AI – Common chilled water supply temperature 15. AI – Common primary hot water return temperature 16. AI – Common primary hot water supply temperature 17. AI – Common secondary hot water return temperature 18. AI – Common secondary hot water supply temperature 19. AI – Differential pressure bypass valve position feedback (0-100%; one (1) per system; total of four (4)) 20. AI – Dual temperature water pump VFD speed feedback (0-100%; one (1) per pump) 21. AI – Dual temperature water system BTU 22. AI – Dual temperature water system differential pressure 23. AI – Dual temperature water system flow 24. AI – Heat exchanger control valve position feedback (0-100%; one (1) per heat exchanger) 25. AI – Hot water system differential pressure 26. AI – Minimum flow bypass valve position feedback (0-100%) 27. AI – Primary hot water pump VFD speed feedback (0-100%; one (1) per pump) 28. AI – Secondary hot water pump VFD speed feedback (0-100%; one (1) per pump) 29. AI – Secondary hot water system BTU 30. AI – Secondary hot water system flow 31. AI – Water source heat pump condenser water differential pressure (one (1) per heat pump) 32. AI – Water source heat pump condenser water return temperature (one (1) per heat pump) 33. AI – Water source heat pump condenser water supply temperature (one (1) per heat pump) 34. AI – Water source heat pump evaporator water differential pressure (one (1) per heat pump) 35. AI – Water source heat pump evaporator water return temperature (one (1) per heat pump) 36. AI – Water source heat pump evaporator water supply temperature (one (1) per heat pump) 37. AI – Water source heat pump flow control valve position feedback (0-100%; two (2) per heat pump) 38. AO – Air source heat pump flow control valve position control (0-100%; one (1) per heat pump) 39. AO – Chilled water pump VFD speed control (0-100%; one (1) per pump) 40. AO – Differential pressure bypass valve position control (0-100%; one (1) per system); total of four (4)) 41. AO – Dual temperature water pump VFD speed control (0-100%; one (1) per pump) 42. AO – Heat exchanger control valve position control (0-100%; one (1) per heat exchanger) 43. AO – Minimum flow bypass valve position control (0-100%) 44. AO – Primary hot water pump VFD speed control (0-100%; one (1) per pump) 45. AO – Secondary hot water pump VFD speed control (0-100%; one (1) per pump) 46. AO – Water source heat pump flow control valve position control (0-100%; two (2) per heat pump) 47. DI – Air source heat pump common alarm (one (1) per heat pump) 48. DI – Air source heat pump status (one (1) per heat pump) 49. DI – Chilled water pump status (via current sensing relay; one (1) per pump) 50. DI – Chilled water pump VFD common alarm (one (1) per pump) 51. DI – Dual temperature water pump status (via current sensing relay; one (1) per pump) 52. DI – Dual temperature water pump VFD common alarm (one (1) per pump) 53. DI – Expansion tank high pressure switch (one (1) per expansion tank) 54. DI – Isolation valve position (via end switch; one (1) per valve) 55. DI – Primary hot water pump status (via current sensing relay; one (1) per pump) 56. DI – Primary hot water pump VFD common alarm (one (1) per pump) 57. DI – Secondary hot water pump status (via current sensing relay; one (1) per pump) 58. DI – Secondary hot water pump VFD common alarm (one (1) per pump) 59. DI – Water source heat pump common alarm (one (1) per heat pump) 60. DI – Water source heat pump status (one (1) per heat pump) 61. DO – Air source heat pump command (one (1) per heat pump) 62. DO – Chilled water pump command (enable/disable; one (1) per pump) 63. DO – Dual temperature water pump command (enable/disable; one (1) per pump) 64. DO – Isolation valve command (open/closed; one (1) per valve) 65. DO – Primary hot water pump command (enable/disable; one (1) per pump) 66. DO – Secondary hot water pump command (enable/disable; one (1) per pump) 67. DO – Water source heat pump command (one (1) per heat pump) 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230993 -12  SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS  58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230993 -13  SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS  R. Provide the following points on the associated equipment graphic in addition to the hardwired points indicated above: 1. Chilled water supply temperature setpoint 2. Dual temperature water supply temperature setpoint 3. Dual temperature water tonnage (calculated by BMS) 4. Expansion tank high pressure alarm 5. Heat exchanger failure 6. Heat pump command (per heat pump) 7. High and low chilled water supply and return temperature alarms 8. High and low dual temperature water supply and return temperature alarms 9. High and low hot water supply and return temperature alarms 10. Individual heat pump failure 11. Individual heat pump priority 12. Individual heat pump runtime 13. Individual heat pump tonnage capability 14. Individual pump failure 15. Individual pump priority (lead/lag/standby) 16. Individual pump runtime 17. Mode of operation (winter/summer/simultaneous heating and cooling) 18. Outdoor air humidity (global point) 19. Outdoor air temperature (global point) 20. Primary hot water delta T 21. Primary hot water delta T setpoint 22. Secondary hot water supply temperature setpoint 23. System command (enable/disable) 24. Total chilled water load (calculated by BMS) 25. Total hot water load (calculated by BMS) 1.12 SECONDARY DUAL TEMPERATURE WATER SYSTEM SERVING INDUCTION UNITS 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230993 -14  SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS  A. General 1. There are two (2) secondary dual temperature water systems serving the induction units located on the 8th floor and the 25th floor. Each system serves four (4) zones: north, east, west, and south. 2. Each system consists of the following new mechanical equipment: a. One (1) hot water plate and frame heat exchanger serving the north, east, and west zones (PFHX-8-1/PFHX-25-1) b. One (1) hot water plate and frame heat exchanger serving the south zone (PFHX-8.2/PFHX-25-2) c. One (1) dual temperature water pump for each zone (P-13 thru P-16 (8th floor) & P.47 thru P-50 (25th floor)) d. One (1) standby dual temperature water pump (P-12 (8th floor) & P-51 (25th floor)) 3. There is also a Stage V secondary dual temperature water system located on the 8th floor serving the Stage V induction units which consists of the following new mechanical equipment: a. One (1) hot water plate and frame heat exchanger (PFHX-STAGE-V) b. Two (2) dual temperature water pumps operating in lead/standby configuration (P-1 & P-2) 4. Each zone consists of summer/winter switchover valves, a 3-way mixing temperature control valve, and a differential pressure bypass valve. B. The BMS contractor shall: 1. Reuse the existing DDC controllers for each secondary dual temperature water system that were provided as new as part of the Plaza Building BMS upgrade project (AKF project #240454). 2. Reuse the existing temperature sensors and current sensing relays that were provided as new as part of the Plaza Building BMS upgrade project (AKF project #240454). 3. Provide a communication interface to each pump’s VFD. The BMS shall monitor all points available via the interface. Coordinate with the unit manufacturer for listing of available points. This shall include but not be limited to new wiring and electrical conduit, etc. 4. Furnish, install, and wire any additional components as required to achieve a completely operational system. This shall include, but not be limited to, temperature control valves on the primary side of each new heat exchanger, automatic isolation valves on the secondary side of each new heat exchanger, differential pressure transmitters, etc. 5. Provide add/alternate pricing for the replacement of the existing control valves as shown on the mechanical drawings. This shall include, but not be limited to, summer/winter valves, differential pressure bypass valves, and 3-way mixing valves. C. Modes of Operation 1. The secondary dual temperature water system shall be started based upon a start time optimization program, time of day schedule, or via a manual command. 2. The system shall operate in winter mode when the outdoor air temperature falls below 60°F (adj.) or via a manual command. 3. The system shall operate in summer mode when the outdoor air temperature falls rises above 65°F (adj.) or via a manual command. D. Winter Mode 1. Upon a command to enable the system in winter mode, the hot water heat exchangers shall be enabled and the main chilled water supply and return valves shall close. The heat exchanger bypass valves shall be closed. The 3-way mixing valve shall be fully open to the dual temperature return piping and the summer/winter isolation valves associated with the 3-way mixing valve shall be closed. The temperature control valve and the isolation valve at each heat exchanger shall open. 2. The secondary dual temperature water pumps shall energize when all valves are in their appropriate position, as sensed by valve end switches. 3. The differential pressure bypass valve shall modulate as necessary to maintain its associated zone's differential pressure setpoint (adj.). 4. The heat exchanger's temperature control valve shall modulate as necessary to maintain the secondary hot water supply temperature setpoint of 178°F (adj.). The secondary hot water supply temperature setpoint shall be reset by the outside air temperature. The secondary hot water supply temperature setpoint shall be reset linearly from 120°F (adj.) to 178°F (adj.) as the outside air temperature falls from 50°F (adj.) to 0°F (adj.). 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230993 -15  SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS  E. Summer Mode 1. Upon a command to enable the system in summer mode, the hot water heat exchangers shall be disabled and the heat exchangers' associated valves shall be closed. The 3-way mixing valve shall be fully open at startup to the dual temperature return piping and the summer/winter isolation valves associated with the 3-way mixing valve shall be open. The main chilled water supply and return valves shall open. The heat exchanger bypass valves shall open. 2. The secondary dual temperature water pumps shall energize when all valves are in their appropriate position, as sensed by valve end switches. 3. The differential pressure bypass valve shall modulate as necessary to maintain its associated zone's differential pressure setpoint (adj.). 4. The 3-way mixing valve shall modulate as necessary to maintain the dual temperature water return temperature setpoint (adj.). F. Pump Failure 1. At any time a pump command does not equal a pump status, except immediately after startup, a pump failure alarm shall be generated on the BMS that notifies the BMS operator of the specific pump that has failed, and that pump shall be commanded off. The BMS shall wait 30 seconds to see the pump status change before indicating a pump failure alarm. 2. In the event of a pump failure, the BMS operator shall be notified to manually open the standby pump's associated isolation valves to serve the zone served by the pump that has failed. The isolation valves associated with the failed pump shall be closed. G. Provide the following points hardwired to the BMS: 1. All points available via a BACnet interface to each VFD 2. AI – 3-way temperature control valve position feedback (0-100%; one (1) per zone; total of nine (9) zones) 3. AI – Dual temperature water pump VFD speed feedback (0-100%; one (1) per pump) 4. AI – Heat exchanger control valve position feedback (0-100%; one (1) per heat exchanger) 5. AI – Heat exchanger hot water return temperature (one (1) per heat exchanger) 6. AI – Heat exchanger hot water supply temperature (one (1) per heat exchanger) 7. AI – Secondary dual temperature water return temperature (one (1) per zone; total of nine (9) zones) 8. AI – Secondary dual temperature water supply temperature (one (1) per zone; total of nine (9) zones) 9. AI – Secondary pressure bypass valve position feedback (0-100%; one (1) per zone; total of nine (9) zones) 10. AI – Secondary system differential pressure (one (1) per zone; total of nine (9) zones) 11. AO – 3-way temperature control valve control (0-100%; one (1) per zone; total of nine (9) zones) 12. AO – Dual temperature water pump VFD speed control (0-100%; one (1) per pump) 13. AO – Heat exchanger control valve position control (0-100%; one (1) per heat exchanger) 14. AO – Secondary pressure bypass valve control (0-100%; one (1) per zone; total of nine (9) zones) 15. DI – Dual temperature water pump VFD common alarm (one (1) per pump) 16. DI – Dual temperature water pump status (via current sensing relay; one (1) per pump) 17. DI – Heat exchanger isolation valve position (via end switch; one (1) per heat exchanger) 18. DI – Heat exchanger bypass valve position (via end switch; one (1) per valve) 19. DI – Summer/winter switchover isolation valve position (via end switch; one (1) per valve) 20. DO – Dual temperature water pump command (enable/disable; one (1) per pump) 21. DO – Heat exchanger isolation valve control (open/closed; one (1) per heat exchanger) 22. DO – Heat exchanger bypass valve command (open/closed; one (1) per valve) 23. DO – Summer/winter switchover isolation valve command (open/closed; one (1) per valve) 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230993 -16  SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS  H. Provide the following points on the associated equipment graphic in addition to the hardwired points indicated above: 1. High and low heat exchanger hot water supply temperature alarms 2. High and low secondary dual temperature water supply temperature alarms 3. Individual hot water supply temperature setpoint 4. Individual hot water supply temperature reset parameters 5. Individual secondary dual temperature water differential pressure setpoint 6. Outside air humidity (global) 7. Outside air temperature (global) 8. Pump failure alarm 9. Mode of operation (winter/summer) 10. Secondary water system command (enable/disable) 1.13 NEW HOT WATER CONTROL VALVES REPLACING EXISTING STEAM CONTROL VALVES A. The BMS contractor shall furnish, install, and wire new hot water valves and valve actuators to replace the existing steam valves for the new preheat and reheat hot water coils. This shall include hot water valves and actuators for all coils as shown on the mechanical drawings. Refer to mechanical schedule for coil quantities. Provide one (1) control valve for each preheat or heating coil section at a minimum. B. The BMS contractor shall furnish, install, and wire any control devices or sensors that are damaged or as needed to achieve a fully operational system. This shall include, but not be limited to, valves, valve actuators, freezestats, preheat coil temperature sensors, etc. C. The new hot water valves shall operate per the existing sequence of operations and shall be hardwired back to the respective DDC controller that controlled the steam valve. D. Provide the following points hardwired to the BMS: 1. AI – Preheat coil discharge air temperature (if needed) 2. AO – Hot water valve control (0-100%; one (1) per coil section) 3. DI – Freezestat status (for each; if needed) END OF SECTION 230993 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  230993 -17  SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS  SECTION 232114 HYDRONIC SPECIALTIES PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Expansion tanks. B. Buffer Tanks C. Air vents. D. Air separators. E. Strainers. F. Pressure-temperature test plugs. G. Relief valves. H. Glycol system. 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Section 232113 -Hydronic Piping. B. Section 232500 -HVAC Water Treatment: Pipe cleaning. 1.03 SUBMITTALS A. See Section 013000 -Administrative Requirements, for submittal procedures. B. Product Data: Provide product data for manufactured products and assemblies required for this project. Include component sizes, rough-in requirements, service sizes, and finishes. Include product description and model. C. Manufacturer's Installation Instructions: Indicate hanging and support methods, joining procedures. 1.04 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Accept valves on site in shipping containers with labeling in place. Inspect for damage. B. Provide temporary end caps and closures on piping and fittings. Maintain in place until installation. C. Protect piping systems from entry of foreign materials by temporary covers, completing sections of the work, and isolating parts of completed system. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 EXPANSION TANKS A. General: 1. Provide as shown on the drawings, a pressurization and air elimination system to accommodate the expanded water generated by the increase in temperature in the water system and to control the increase in pressure at all critical components in the system to the maximum allowable for those components. 2. The pressurization and air elimination system shall ensure that all air in the system shall be eliminated. The only air in the system shall be the permanent sealed in air cushion contained in the pressurization controller component of the system, a bladder type expansion tank, pre-charged to the minimum operating pressure at the location indicated on the drawing. 3. All free air originally contained in the system, and all entrained air bubbles carried by system water shall be eliminated at all points in the piping system where the capability of water to hold air in solution is lowest (the point of lowest solubility), and as indicated on the drawings. The air separating and elimination component shall separate entrained air from flowing system water by the creation of a vortex which will allow free air to rise in the center, the point of lowest velocity, to an air elimination valve. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  232114 -1  Hydronic Specialties  B. Manufacturers: 1. Amtrol Inc: www.amtrol.com. 2. ITT Bell & Gossett: www.bellgossett.com. 3. Taco, Inc: www.taco-hvac.com. 4. Construction: Welded steel, tested and stamped in accordance with ASME BPVC-VIII-1; supplied with National Board Form U-1, rated for working pressure of 125 psi, with flexible EPDM bladder sealed into tank, and steel support stand. 5. Accessories: Pressure gauge and air-charging fitting, tank drain; precharge to 12 psi. 6. Automatic Cold Water Fill Assembly: Pressure reducing valve, reduced pressure double check backflow preventer, test cocks, strainer, vacuum breaker, and valved by-pass. 7. Orientation: Vertical or Horizontal as per documents 8. Size and capacity as scheduled on the drawings. 9. Features: a. Integral structural steel supports b. Base for vertical tanks. c. Cradle for horizontal tanks. d. Gasketed handhole. e. Gasketed manhole. f. All tappings for gauge glass, instrumentation, drain, fill and connections to system: Refer to detail on the drawings. g. Pre-charged with air to pressure scheduled on drawings. 2.02 BUFFER TANKS A. Manufacturers: 1. Cemline Corporation: CWB Series 2. Approved equal B. Provide Chilled water buffer tank of size and capacity and vertical or horizontal arrangement as indicated. C. Tank shall be ASME Code constructed and stamped in accordance with Section VIII of the ASME Code. D. Tank shall be registered with the National Board of Boiler and Pressure Vessel Inspectors and a certificate of shop inspection shall be furnished. E. ASME working pressure shall be 125 psi. F. Material of construction shall be Carbon Steel. G. Internal baffle to divert water flow. H. Connections: Flanged, 150 pound ANSI standard I. Tank Accessories: 1. Air vent (top) 2. Drain connection (bottom) 3. Insulation: 1 1/2" flexible, elastomeric thermal insulation 4. Jacketing: Aluminum, 0.016 inch thick, with bonded polyethylene and kraft paper moisture barrier. 5. Vessels above 42” in diameter shall be furnished with a 12" x 16" manhole. 6. Steel leg stands or ring base for vertical tanks. 7. Seismic rated and designed steel legs for seismic applications 8. Steel support gussets or saddles for horizontal tanks 2.03 AIR VENTS A. Manufacturers: 1. Armstrong International, Inc: www.armstronginternational.com. 2. ITT Bell & Gossett: www.bellgossett.com. 3. Taco, Inc: www.taco-hvac.com. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  232114 -2  Hydronic Specialties  B. Manual Type: Short vertical sections of 2-inch diameter pipe to form air chamber, with 1/8 inch brass needle valve at top of chamber. C. Float Type: 1. Brass or semi-steel body, copper, polypropylene, or solid non-metallic float, stainless steel valve and valve seat; suitable for system operating temperature and pressure; with isolating valve. 2. Cast iron body and cover, float, bronze pilot valve mechanism suitable for system operating temperature and pressure; with isolating valve. 2.04 AIR SEPARATORS A. Centrifugal Air Separators/Strainers: 1. Manufacturers: a. Armstrong International, Inc: www.armstronginternational.com. b. ITT Bell & Gossett: www.bellgossett.com. 2. Steel, tested and stamped in accordance with ASME BPVC-VIII-1; for 125 psi operating pressure, with integral bronze strainer, tangential inlet and outlet connections, internal stainless steel air collector tube and blowdown connection. 3. Size: Match system flow capacity. 2.05 STRAINERS A. Manufacturers: 1. Armstrong International, Inc: www.armstronginternational.com. 2. Mueller____. B. Y-Pattern Strainers: 1. Chilled Water, Condenser Water and Hot Water Systems of Steel Construction: a. Working pressure: To 250 psig, non-shock. 1) Sizes 1/4 inch to 2 inch: ANSI 250 lb. Class. (a) Connections: Threaded. (b) Body: Cast iron, ASTM A126, Class B. With machined seat for screen retention. Galvanized as required to match connecting piping. (c) Cap: Bronze, gasketed. (d) Screen: 20 mesh. 304 stainless steel, ASTM 240. Free area not less than 2-1/2 times inlet area. (e) Blowoff outlet: With female NPT tapping. (f) Mueller model No. 11 MFCB. 2) Sizes 2-1/2 inch to 24 inch: Class 250. (a) Connections: Flanged. (b) Body: Cast iron, ASTM A126, Class B. With machined seat for screen retention. Galvanized as required to match connecting piping. (c) Cover flange: Cast iron, ASTM A126, Class B. With machined seat for screen retention. With female tapped NPT blowoff connection. With EPDM O-ring seal. (d) Screen to 8 inch: 1/8 inch perforations. 304 stainless steel, ASTM 240. Free area not less than 2-1/2 times inlet area. (e) Screen 10 inch and larger: 5/32 inch perforations. 304 stainless steel, ASTM 240. Free area not less than 2-1/2 times inlet area. (f) Magnets: Provide magnets for strainers. All 8 inch and larger. At each pump suction. With continuous magnetic field around entire circumference of screen. With removable cast Alnico No. 5 channel magnets with acceptable baskets constructed of magnetic alloy. Secured with stainless steel retaining lugs and threaded rods. (g) Blowoff outlet: With female NPT tapping. (h) Mueller model No. 752. b. Working pressure: To 285 psig at 100 deg F ANSI Class 150 and 740 psig at 100 deg F ANSI Class 300, non-shock: 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  232114 -3  Hydronic Specialties  1) Sizes 1/2 inch to 12 inch: (a) Connections: Flanged or butt welded to match piping system. (b) Body: Carbon steel, ASTM A216, Grade WCB. With machined seat for screen retention. (c) Cover: Carbon steel, ASTM 215, Grade WCB. With machined seat for screen retention. With female tapped NPT blowoff connection. With non-asbestos gasket. (d) Screen: Screen to 8 inch: 1/8 inch perforations. 304 stainless steel, ASTM 240. Free area not less than 4 times inlet area. (e) Screen 10 inch and larger: 5/32 inch perforations. 304 stainless steel, ASTM 240. Free area not less than 4 times inlet area. (f) Magnets: Provide magnets for strainers. All 8 inch and larger. At each pump suction. With continuous magnetic field around entire circumference of screen. With removable cast Alnico No. 5 channel magnets with acceptable baskets constructed of magnetic alloy. Secured with stainless steel retaining lugs and threaded rods. (g) Blowoff outlet: With female NPT tapping. (h) Mueller model No. 761 for ANSI Class 150. Mueller model No. 762 for ANSI Class 300. 2. Chilled Water, Condenser Water and Hot Water and Glycol Systems of Copper Construction: a. Working pressure: To 250 psig, non-shock.. 1) Sizes 1/4 inch to 2 inch: Class 250 (a) Connections: Threaded. (b) Body: Bronze, ASTM B62. With machined seat for screen retention. (c) Cap: Bronze, ASTM B62. With machined seat for screen retention. (d) Screen: 20 mesh. 304 stainless steel, ASTM 240. Free area not less than 2-1/2 time inlet area. (e) Blowoff outlet: With female NPT tapping. (f) Mueller model No. 352M. b. Working pressure to 225 psig Class 150; to 400 psig Class 300: 1) Sizes 2-1/2 inch to 12 inch: (a) Connections: Flanged. (b) Body: Bronze, ASTM B62 (85-5-5-5) or bronze ASTM B61. Aluminum bronze ASTM A148-90 for sizes 8 inch and larger. With machined seat for screen retention. (c) Cover: Material to match body. With machined seat for screen retention. (d) Screen to 8 inch: 1/8 inch perforations. 304 stainless steel, ASTM 240. Free area not less than 2-1/2 times inlet area. (e) Screen 10 inch and larger: 5/32 inch perforations. 304 stainless steel, ASTM 240. Free area not less than 2-1/2 times inlet area. (f) Blowoff outlet: With female NPT tapping. (g) Mueller model No. 851 or 851M for Class 150. (h) Mueller model. No. 852 for Class 300. 2.06 PRESSURE-TEMPERATURE TEST PLUGS A. Manufacturers: 1. Ferguson Enterprises Inc: www.fnw.com. 2. Peterson Equipment Company Inc: www.petesplug.com. 3. Sisco Manufacturing Company Inc: www.siscomfg.com. B. Construction: Brass body designed to receive temperature or pressure probe with removable protective cap, and Neoprene rated for minimum 200 degrees F. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  232114 -4  Hydronic Specialties  C. Application: Use extended length plugs to clear insulated piping. 2.07 RELIEF VALVES A. Manufacturers: 1. Apollo Valves: www.apollovalves.com. 2. Armstrong International, Inc: www.armstronginternational.com. 3. ITT Bell & Gossett: www.bellgossett.com. B. Bronze body, teflon seat, stainless steel stem and springs, automatic, direct pressure actuated, capacities ASME certified and labelled. 2.08 GLYCOL MAKE-UP SYSTEM A. The contractor shall supply and install, as indicated on the plans and in the specifications, a prefabricated, automatic and autonomous make-up package for each glycol system or one system to serve all systems with multiple pumps a isolation valving. B. The package shall be designed to occupy a minimum amount of floor space to operate on a standard 110V, 60Hz electrical circuit, and to maintain a fill pressure in the glycol system. The pumping assembly shall be mounted in a sturdy steel frame with legs to keep it off the floor. It shall include a brass rotary vane pump sized by treatment manufacturer, a motor, a magnetic starter, a pressure tank with a pressure control, a priming valve, a PRV, a shut-off valve and a pressure gauge. It shall be connected to the system with a .” NPT connection. C. It shall feature a cut-off and alarm arrangement which will stop the pump in case of excessive pressure, or a low solution level, and active an audible (which can be silenced) and a visual alarm. A 110V shall also be available for a remote alarm. A translucent polyethylene (50) gallon solution container, complete with lid, shall be mounted on the pumping assembly and shall include a strainer and a shut off valve. A glycol solution recovery line shall be piped in from the system relief valve outlet to the solution container, through its lid in such a way that the lid can be removed for filling and mixing. D. The make-up package shall be Wessels Model GMP with discharge pressure factory preset and fixed adjustable. 2.09 GLYCOL SOLUTION A. Provide industrial grade, propylene or ethylene glycol solution with corrosion inhibitors and environmental stabilizer additives as indicated on the drawings. Solution to be factory pre.mixed with water at a minimum 30% concentration by volume or as indicated on the drawings. B. Use, handle, store, clean up and dispose of glycol solution in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and all environmental regulations. C. Propylene Glycol to be DOWFROST Heat Transfer Fluid or approved equal. D. Ethylene Glycol to be DOWTHERM SR-1 Heat Transfer Fluid, with pink dye or approved equal. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 INSTALLATION A. Install specialties in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Provide manual air vents at system high points and as indicated. C. For automatic air vents in ceiling spaces or other concealed locations, provide vent tubing to nearest drain. D. Provide air separator on suction side of system circulation pump and connect to expansion tank. E. Provide valved drain and hose connection on strainer blowdown connection. F. Support pump fittings with floor-mounted pipe and flange supports. G. Provide relief valves on pressure tanks, low-pressure side of reducing valves, heat exchangers, and expansion tanks. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  232114 -5  Hydronic Specialties  H. Select system relief valve capacity so that it is greater than make-up pressure reducing valve capacity. Select equipment relief valve capacity to exceed rating of connected equipment. I. Pipe relief valve outlet to nearest floor drain. J. Where one line vents several relief valves, make cross-sectional area equal to sum of individual vent areas. K. Install glycol make-up spstem in acordance with manufacturer's instructions. L. Clean and flush glycol system before adding glycol solution. Refer to Section 232500. M. Feed glycol solution to system through make-up line with pressure regulator, venting system high points. N. Feed glycol solution to system through make-up line with pressure regulator, venting system high points. Set to fill at 12 psi. O. Feed glycol solution to system through make-up line with pressure regulator, venting system high points. Pressure system cold at 5 psi. P. Perform tests determining strength of glycol and water solution and submit written test results. 3.02 MAINTENANCE A. Provide service and maintenance of glycol system for one year from date of Substantial Completion at no extra charge to Owner. B. Perform monthly visit to make glycol fluid concentration analysis on site with refractive index measurement instrument. Report findings in detail in writing, including analysis and amounts of glycol or water added. C. Explain corrective actions to Owner's maintenance personnel in person. END OF SECTION 232114 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  232114 -6  Hydronic Specialties  SECTION 232123 HYDRONIC PUMPS PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Separately coupled, vertical, in-line centrifugal pumps. B. Separately coupled, base-mounted, end-suction centrifugal pumps C. Separately coupled, base-mounted, double-suction centrifugal pumps. 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Section 230513 -Common Motor Requirements for HVAC Equipment. B. Section 230548 -Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC. C. Section 230716 -HVAC Equipment Insulation. D. Section 232113 -Hydronic Piping. E. Section 232114 -Hydronic Specialties. 1.03 REFERENCE STANDARDS A. NFPA 70 -National Electrical Code; Most Recent Edition Adopted by Authority Having Jurisdiction, Including All Applicable Amendments and Supplements. B. UL 778 -Standard for Motor-Operated Water Pumps; Current Edition, Including All Revisions. 1.04 SUBMITTALS A. See Section 013000 -Administrative Requirements, for submittal procedures. B. Product Data: Provide certified pump curves showing performance characteristics with pump and system operating point plotted. Include NPSH curve when applicable. Include electrical characteristics and connection requirements, furnished specialties, final impeller dimensions, and accessories for each type of product indicated. C. Millwright's Certificate: Certify that base mounted pumps have been aligned. D. Manufacturer's Installation Instructions: Indicate hanging and support requirements and recommendations. E. Operation and Maintenance Data: Include installation instructions, assembly views, lubrication instructions, and replacement parts list. F. Maintenance Materials: Furnish the following for Owner's use in maintenance of project. 1. See Section 016000 -Product Requirements, for additional provisions. 2. Extra Pump Seals: one for each type and size of pump. 1.05 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Manufacturer Qualifications: Company specializing in manufacture, assembly, and field performance of pumps, with minimum three years of documented experience. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 HVAC PUMPS -GENERAL A. Provide pumps that operate at specified system fluid temperatures without vapor binding and cavitation, are non-overloading in parallel or individual operation, and operate within 25 percent of midpoint of published maximum efficiency curve. B. Base Mounted Pumps: Aligned by qualified millwright. C. Products Requiring Electrical Connection: Listed and classified by UL or testing agency acceptable to Authority Having Jurisdiction as suitable for the purpose specified and indicated. D. Pump Units: factory assembled and tested, package pump and motor, single-stage except as noted, and suitable for scheduled conditions of service. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  232123 -1  Hydronic Pumps  E. Pump and motor capacities: Minimum as scheduled, suitable for parallel operation. Each motor shall be non-overloading and shall operate over entire head capacity range of pump without exceeding nameplate horsepower rating. F. Pump characteristics: Pump curve shall rise continuously from maximum capacity to shutoff. Shut off head shall be approximately 10 percent greater than design head. Operation shall be at or near peak efficiency. Pumps shall be capable of operating at 25 percent beyond design capacity without exceeding breakoff point. Impeller diameter shall not exceed minimum published diameter plus 90 percent of the difference between published maximum and minimum impeller diameters. G. Casing: of material specified, with ANSI flanges on inlet and outlet, plugged drain and vent connections, plugged gauge tappings at suction and discharge nozzles, and replaceable bronze wearing rings. H. Impeller: Centrifugal type except as noted, totally enclosed, non-over loading, one-piece impeller of material specified, with entire rotating assembly statically, dynamically and hydraulically balanced. I. Motor: High efficiency, ODP type conforming to specification section “MOTORS”. J. Abrasive separator: Except as noted, provide seal finish piping connections with stainless steel abrasive separator. K. Bearings: except as noted, grease lubricated or oil lubricated with oiled, moisture and dust resistant housing, minimum 20,000 hour B-10 life (100,000 hour average life) under scheduled conditions of service. L. Pumps shall be tested and designed to withstand 1-1/2 times the specified working pressure. M. Performance curve derived from certified laboratory tests only. N. All Pumps and Packaged pump systems with controllers shall have short circuit current rating: 1. All electrical equipment, starters and controller assemblies shall be provided with short circuit rating as follows: a. Provide controllers with listed short circuit current rating not less than.100,000 AIC unless approved by the engineer based on submitted short circuit study. b. Listed series ratings are acceptable, except where not permitted by motor contribution according to NFPA 70. c. Label equipment utilizing series ratings as required by NFPA 70. 2.02 SEPARATELY COUPLED, VERTICAL, IN-LINE CENTRIFUGAL PUMPS A. Manufacturers: 1. Armstrong Pumps Inc. 2. Bell & Gossett; Div. of ITT Industries. 3. Flowserve Corporation; Div. of Ingersoll-Dresser Pumps. B. Description: Factory-assembled and -tested, centrifugal, overhung-impeller, separately coupled, in-line pump as defined in HI 1.1-1.2 and HI 1.3; designed for installation with pump and motor shafts mounted vertically. Rate pump for 175-psig (1204-kPa) minimum working pressure and a continuous water temperature of 250 deg F (121 deg C). C. Pump Construction: 1. Casing: Radially split, cast iron, with replaceable bronze wear rings, threaded gauge tappings at inlet and outlet nozzles, drain plug, and companion-flange connections. 2. Impeller: ASTM B 584, cast bronze; statically and dynamically balanced, keyed to shaft and secured with a locking cap screw. Trim impeller to match specified performance. 3. Pump Shaft: Stainless steel. 4. Mechanical Seal: Internally flushed, Carbon rotating ring against a ceramic seat held by a stainless-steel spring, and Buna-N bellows and gasket. Include water slinger on shaft between motor and seal. 5. Pump Bearings: Permanently lubricated ball bearings. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  232123 -2  Hydronic Pumps  D. Shaft Coupling: Axially split spacer coupling. E. Motor: Single speed, with permanently lubricated ball bearings, unless otherwise indicated; rigidly mounted to pump casing with lifting eye and supporting lugs in motor enclosure. Comply with requirements in Division 23 Section "Common Motor Requirements for HVAC Equipment." 2.03 SEPARATELY COUPLED, BASE-MOUNTED, END-SUCTION CENTRIFUGAL PUMPS A. Manufacturers: 1. Bell & Gossett; Div. of ITT Industries. 2. PACO Pumps. B. Description: Base-mounted, centrifugal, flexible-coupled, end-suction, single-stage, bronze-fitted, back-pull-out, radially split case design; with a front mounted volute to allow servicing of the impeller and bearing assembly without disturbing piping connections. 1. Casing: Close grained cast iron, with flanged piping connections, drain plug at low point of volute, vent plug at high point of volute, threaded gauge tappings at inlet and outlet nozzle connections, and integral feet or other means on volute to support weight of casing and attached piping. Casing shall allow removal and replacement of impeller without disconnecting piping. 2. Impeller: ASTM B 584, cast bronze, statically and dynamically balanced, closed, overhung, single suction, keyed to shaft, and secured by locking cap screw. 3. Shaft: carbon steel 4. Shaft Sleeve: Bronze replaceable to completely cover the wetted area under the seal. 5. Shaft Seal: a. Single inside mounted b. Internally flushed mechanical type c. End face rubber bellows d. Stainless steel springs e. Brass or stainless steel heads f. Babbitt filled carbon rotating washer g. Tungsten carbide rotating seat h. Bronze or stainless steel glands i. Water flush design to provide flush across the face of the mechanical seal. j. With bypass line from pump discharge through cyclone separator to flush gland. Cyclone separator shall be similar to John Crane Kynar. k. Suitable for continuous operation at 225°F (107°C) continuous. l. Provide type as follows: 1) For suction pressures up to 150 psig.: similar to John Crane Type 1. 2) For suction pressures 150 psig or greater: balanced construction seals similar to John Crane Type 1B 6. Working pressure at 225°F (107°C) continuous duty. a. 125 PSIG (860 kPa) C. Base Plate: Cast iron, rolled steel or fabricated structural steel with raised lip, drain tappings, grout holes and anchor bolt holes. D. Coupling: 1. Flexible type. 2. Center drop out design with flange and sleeve section that can be disassembled and removed without removing pump or motor. 3. Capable of absorbing torsional vibration. 4. Provide an EPDM coupler sleeve for pumps with variable frequency drive motor controllers. Coupling shall be Woods spacer type. 5. Provide steel coupling guard of removable type securely fastened to the pump base, compliant with ANSI B15.1 and OSHA 1910.219. E. Motor: Secured to mounting frame, with adjustable alignment. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  232123 -3  Hydronic Pumps  F. Testing: Each pump shall be factory tested per Hydraulic Institute Standards. G. Cleaning and Painting; Clean each pump thoroughly and paint with one coat of primer and two coats of high grade machinery enamel prior to shipment. H. Motor: Single speed, with permanently lubricated ball bearings, unless otherwise indicated; secured to mounting frame, with adjustable alignment. Comply with requirements in Division 23 Section "Common Motor Requirements for HVAC Equipment." 2.04 SEPARATELY COUPLED, BASE-MOUNTED, DOUBLE-SUCTION CENTRIFUGAL PUMPS A. Manufacturers: 1. Bell & Gossett; Div. of ITT Industries. 2. Taco, Inc 3. PACO Pumps. 4. Weinman; Div. of Crane Pumps & Systems. B. Description: Base-mounted, centrifugal, flexible-coupled, double-suction, single-stage, bronze-fitted, axially split case design. C. Casing: 1. Material: a. Close grained cast iron to 175 PSIG working pressure 2. Axially split with suction and discharge flanges on a common centerline in both the vertical and horizontal planes. 3. Mounting feet cast integral with the lower half of the casing 4. Suction and discharge Flanges: a. 125 PSIG ASA Standard 5. Threaded gauge tappings at volute suction and discharge nozzle connections. 6. Threaded drain plug at low point of volute 7. Threaded Vent plug and valve at high point of volute 8. Upper half of casing shall be removable without disturbing suction and discharge piping. D. Impeller: ASTM B 584, cast bronze, statically and dynamically balanced, enclosed, type double suction, and keyed to shaft. E. Wear Rings: Casing and impeller wear rings shall be renewable, dissimilar bronze of hardness to protect against polling. The rings shall be installed with an anti-rotation device, and designed to prevent leakage across the ring bit. F. Shaft: 416 stainless steel, designed to operate under load with minimum deflection. Stuffing box housing and bearing brackets shall be made of cast iron, separate from the casing and mounted in cylindrical bits in the end of the casing. G. Shaft sleeve: renewable, unhardened 416 stainless steel. H. Shaft seal: 1. Mechanical seal a. Single inside mounted b. Internally flushed mechanical type. c. End face rubber bellows d. Stainless steel springs e. Brass or stainless steel heads f. Babbitt filled carbon rotating washer g. Tungsten carbide rotating seat. h. Bronze or stainless steel glands i. Water flush design to provide flush across face of the mechanical seal. j. With bypass line from pump discharge through cyclone separator to flush gland. Cyclone separator shall be similar to John Crane Kynar. k. Suitable for continuous operation at 225°F (107°C) 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  232123 -4  Hydronic Pumps  SECTION 232500 HVAC WATER TREATMENT PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Materials. 1. System cleaner. 2. Closed system treatment (water). B. By-pass (pot) feeder. C. Solution metering pump. D. Solution tanks. 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Section 016000 -Product Requirements: Owner furnished treatment equipment. B. Section 232113 -Hydronic Piping. C. Section 232114 -Hydronic Specialties. 1.03 REFERENCE STANDARDS A. NFPA 70 -National Electrical Code; Most Recent Edition Adopted by Authority Having Jurisdiction, Including All Applicable Amendments and Supplements. B. UL (DIR) -Online Certifications Directory; current listings at database.ul.com. 1.04 SUBMITTALS A. See Section 013000 -Administrative Requirements, for submittal procedures. B. Product Data: Provide chemical treatment materials, chemicals, and equipment including electrical characteristics and connection requirements. C. Shop Drawings: Indicate system schematic, equipment locations, and controls schematics, electrical characteristics and connection requirements. D. Product Data:  Include rated capacities, operating characteristics, furnished specialties, and accessories for the following products: 1. Bypass feeders. 2. Water meters. 3. Inhibitor injection timers. 4. pH controllers. 5. TDS controllers. 6. Biocide feeder timers. 7. Chemical solution tanks. 8. Injection pumps. 9. Chemical test equipment. 10. Chemical material safety data sheets. 11. Water softeners. 12. RO units. 13. Multimedia filters. 14. Self-cleaning strainers. 15. Bag-or cartridge-type filters. 16. Centrifugal separators. E. Manufacturer's Installation Instructions: Indicate placement of equipment in systems, piping configuration, and connection requirements. F. Maintenance Materials: Furnish the following for Owner's use in maintenance of project. 1. See Section 016000 -Product Requirements, for additional provisions. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  232500 -1  HVAC Water Treatment  1.05 SHORT CIRCUIT CURRENT RATING: A. All electrical equipment, starters and controller assemblies shall be provided with short circuit rating as follows: 1. Provide controllers with listed short circuit current rating not less than.100,000 AIC unless approved by the engineer based on submitted short circuit study. 2. Listed series ratings are acceptable, except where not permitted by motor contribution according to NFPA 70. 3. Label equipment utilizing series ratings as required by NFPA 70. 1.06 MAINTENANCE SERVICE A. Scope of Maintenance Service:  Provide chemicals and service program to maintain water conditions required above to inhibit corrosion, scale formation, and biological growth for cooling, chilled-water piping, heating, hot-water piping, heating, steam and condensate piping, condenser-water piping, and steam and condensate system for humidifier and cooking appliance applicationsheating, hot-water pipingheating, steam and condensate piping condenser-water piping steam and condensate system for humidifier and cooking appliance applications and equipment.  Services and chemicals shall be provided for a period of one year from date of Substantial Completion, and shall include the following: B. Initial water analysis and HVAC water-treatment recommendations. C. Startup assistance for Contractor to flush the systems, clean with detergents, and initially fill systems with required chemical treatment prior to operation. D. Periodic field service and consultation. E. Customer report charts and log sheets. F. Laboratory technical analysis. G. Analyses and reports of all chemical items concerning safety and compliance with government regulations. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 MANUFACTURERS A. GE Water & Process Technologies; ______: www.gewater.com. B. Nalco, an Ecolab Company; ______: www.nalco.com. 2.02 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS A. Comply with applicable codes for addition of non-potable chemicals to building mechanical systems and to public sewage systems. B. Comply with UL (DIR) requirements. C. Perform work in accordance with local health department regulations. 2.03 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS A. A single water treatment company shall provide all products and serviced for undivided responsibility throughout the warranty period. B. The water treatment company shall be a recognized specialist in the field of industrial water treatment for a minimum of ten (10) years. C. The water treatment company shall have knowledgeable and experienced personnel on staff who are chemical engineers or chemists and have been in the field of industrial water treatment for over ten (10) years. D. The water treatment company shall have a technical service representative within two (2) hours drive of the job site for the duration of the warranty period. E. The water treatment company shall have a technical service representative within two (2) hours drive of the job site for the duration of the warranty period. F. Quality Assurance: 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  232500 -2  HVAC Water Treatment  1. Filter shall be designed to provide 0.5 micron filtration by utilizing ultrafine sand with an effective size of not more than 0.16 millimeters. 2. Filter design flow rate shall be greater than 20 GPM per square foot of surface area. 3. Filter shall be sized to remove at least 50% (by count) of the 0.5 micron particles and at least 80 % (by count) of the 2 micron particles typically found in cooling water, within 30 days of startup. G. Filter system shall be rated for the system operating pressure. H. Tanks shall be #304L Stainless Steel rated for the operating pressure of the piping system being connected to.. I. Manifold shall be Type L copper. 1. Piping: ASTM B 88, Type L (ASTM B 88M, Type B) copper water tube, copper-alloy solder-joint fittings, and brazed joints. 2. Safety Valves:  Automatic pressure relief. J. System shall be factory assembled and tested for rated pressure and control functions. 1. Submittals: a. Submit shop drawings and product data as follows: b. Submit shop drawings indicating system schematics, equipment locations, and component locations. c. Submit manufacturer’s installation instructions. d. If alternate product is submitted, provide Particle Distribution Analysis results from at least three previous users where the criteria described in Quality Assurance section is met. Include tower tonnage, tower water circulation rate, temperature drop across the tower, and filtration rate. Note % of tower water circulation rate being filtered in each case. Include facility name, address, contacts and phone numbers. e. Operation and Maintenance Data: f. Submit operation and maintenance data in a binder. 2. Acceptable Products: 3. AmeriWater High Efficiency CW-series 0.5 Micron Sand Filter. 4. Diamond filter – High efficiency filter. 0.5 Micron Sand Filter 5. Vortisand High efficiency filter. 0.5 Micron Sand Filter 6. a. Filter shall be comprised of #304L Stainless Steel vessel(s) with Type L copper manifold and cast iron circulating pump. The backwash shall be adjustable on the field for either city water or system water. The filter shall be mounted on a Stainless Steel skid. b. Fabricate and label steel filter tanks to comply with ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code: Section VIII, Division 1. c. Components: 1) Natural quartz media shall meet AWWA B-100, ANSI, and NSF-61 standards for consistently uniform and chemically inert filter media. Crushed or ground media is not acceptable. 2) Valves shall be JC two-piece bronze ball type with multi-piece packing set, blowout proof stem design, adjustable packing gland, stainless ball and stem, RPTFE seat. Valves shall be actuated with individual 24V electric motors on each valve. 3) Filter shall be equipped with two pressure gauges. The gauges shall be anti flutter and shall have a stainless steel casing, with brass internals. The minimum face size shall be no less than 2-1/2". One gauge marked (IN) shall be connected to the filter pump discharge and the second gauge marked (OUT) shall be connected to the outlet side of the filter. d. Top inlet distributor shall be 304 stainless steel. Under drain shall be 316 stainless steel wedgewire screen pipe. e. Backwash flow control shall be rated for full backwash flow from 25 PSIG to 120 PSIG. f. Filter pump shall be cast iron, close coupled with mechanical seal. Pump motor to be TEFC with a service factor of not less than 1.15. g. Filter control shall be mounted in a NEMA 4X enclosure and shall contain the following: 1) An Allen Bradley 1200 Series PLC 2) An Allen Bradley motor starter and service disconnect. 3) A step-down transformer to convert 3phase power to 115 VAC to operate control components and convert 115 VAC to 24V for valve actuation. 4) A pressure differential switch factory set to initiate backwash at 18 PSI differential across the filter bed. 5) A manual backwash switch, of a momentary contact design, mounted on the outside of the control panel door. 6) A backwash indicating light, pump status light and pump on/off switch mounted on the outside of the control panel door. 7) A non-resettable backwash counter mounted on the outside of the control panel door to indicate the number of times the filter has backwashed. 8) PLC shall be programmed to control valve actuation, duration of the backwash cycle, and pump on/off. Backwash shall be initiated by the 24-hour timer, pressure differential switch, or manual backwash button. An internal delay of no less than 15 seconds shall be built into the program timer to avoid false backwashing. 9) PLC shall also include a set of dry contacts that can be connected to the BMS to monitor backwash frequency. h. Installation: 1) Place vessels as shown in installation drawing and level. Use manifold as guide for spacing. 2) Install upper and lower manifolds as per manufacturer’s instructions. 3) Install piping between manifold and pump(s) if necessary. 4) Attach control panel to vessel mount. 5) Connect control wiring to valves. 6) Connect electrical power to control panel and control to pump(s) according to local electrical codes and wiring diagram supplied by manufacturer. 7) Install media according to manufacturer’s instructions. i. Startup & Testing: 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  232500 -3  HVAC Water Treatment  1) Startup by factory authorized agent shall be provided. 2) Submit cooling water particle analysis reports showing count and volume of particles within the following micron size ranges: 0.5 to 1, 1 to 2, 2 to 5, 5 to 10, 10 to 20, and 20 and larger at time of startup. 3) Submit cooling water particle analysis reports showing count and volume of particles within the following micron size ranges: 0.5 to 1, 1 to 2, 2 to 5, 5 to 10, 10 to 20, and 20 and larger 30 days after startup. 4) Submit report analyzing results from testing and confirming that system meets performance specifications in paragraph above. K. The water treatment company shall have a well-equipped laboratory managed by qualified personnel. L. All products furnished shall be proven reliable and have good proven performances. 2.04 DESCRIPTION OF WATER TREATMENT SERVICE. A. Furnish the following as base bid 1. Retain qualified water treatment firm for the following: 2. Supervision of installation of chemical feeding and treatment control equipment, and of initial application of water treatment. 3. Supply release title to chemicals for initial cleaning, chemicals for required water treatment, equipment for feeding water treatment chemicals, equipment for control water treatment written instructions for application and control of initial. Cleaning and have water treatment, material Safety Data Sheets for each cleaning and treatment chemical and test equipment and reagents. 4. Color Comparators a. PH range, 6.8 to 8.2, 4.0 to 11.0 b. Glutarldehyde range 20 to 100 ppm c. Molybdate range 1 to 10 ppm as Na2MoO4 5. Drop test sets: a. Chloride, 1 drop equals 10 ppm NaCl b. Phosphonate, 1 drop equals 2 ppm organophosphorous sequestering agent. c. Molybdate range 1 drop equals 5 ppm as Na2MoO4 6. Conductivity meter: a. 5 ranges, 0 to 19.99, 0 to 199.9, 0 to 1999 uS/cm, 0 to 19.99, 0 to 199.9 mS/cm b. Digital LED display, auto temperature compensation (0 to 50C) c. Accuracy + 1.0% full scale 7. Water sample bottles 8. Water treatment log sheets 9. Corrosion test coupons and 4 pass carbon steel apparatus in accordance with ASTM D2688 Method B for all water systems. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  232500 -4  HVAC Water Treatment  B. Supervise continuing water treatment 1. A qualified technical representative shall visit premises at least monthly for the following: 2. Review operating and water treatment log sheets, collect samples of water from each treated system for analysis on site and at firm’s laboratory, inspect all chemical feeders and treatment control equipment and if needed, recommend necessary adjustments to maintain treatment control equipment. 3. Provide field test report on-pH, inhibitor, conductivity, appearance and chlorides. 4. Provide laboratory test results on-pH, Alkalinity, Ammonia, Calcium Hardness, Total Hardness, Phosphates-ortho, total, Molybdates, Phosphonates, Copper, Iron, Zinc, Biocides, Conductivity, Total Bacteria, Speciation of Bacteria, and Suspended solids. 5. Provide first 30 days, next 60 days and subsequent quarterly corrosion coupon examination-Sessile Bacteria, Photographs of coupons before and after examination, Weight gained/loss. C. On quarterly basis, provide test results on Legionellas Pneumophila shall be tested quarterly. D. Provide an operating and instructional manual for watch engineers to use before system startup. Conduct a 4-hour training session on how to maintain the water treatment equipment and the chemical programs including lay-up and startup cleanings. E. Treatment period: Water treatment shall apply concurrently with operation of each system for 1 year after final acceptance by Owner. 2.05 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. Water quality for HVAC systems shall minimize corrosion, scale buildup, and biological growth for optimum efficiency of HVAC equipment without creating a hazard to operating personnel or the environment. B. Base HVAC water treatment on quality of water available at Project site, HVAC system equipment material characteristics and functional performance characteristics, operating personnel capabilities, and requirements and guidelines of authorities having jurisdiction. C. Closed hydronic systems, including hot-water heating, chilled water, dual-temperature water, and glycol cooling chilled waterdual-temperature water, shall have the following water qualities: 1. pH: Maintain a value within [8.0 to 10.3] 2. Soluble Copper:  Maintain a maximum value of [0.1]ppm. 3. TDS: Maintain a maximum value [Do not exceed 4,000mmhs 4. Ammonia: Maintain a maximum value of [less than 2.0 ppm. 5. Microbiological Limits: a. Total Aerobic Plate Count:  Maintain a maximum value of 1000 cells / ml. b. Total Anaerobic Plate Count:  Maintain a maximum value of 50cells /ml. c. Nitrate Reducers:  Maintain a maximum value of 50 cells /ml. d. Sulfate Reducers:  Maintain a maximum value of[ 50 cells /ml. e. Iron Bacteria:  Maintain a maximum value of 50 cells /ml 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  232500 -5  HVAC Water Treatment  D. Steam Boiler and Steam Condensate: 1. Steam Condensate: a. pH: Maintain a value within 8.0 to 9.5 b. Soluble Copper:  Maintain a maximum value of 0.1 ppm. c. TDS: Maintain a maximum value of 10 ppm, Feedwater quality dependent. d. Total Hardness:  Maintain a maximum value of 1.0 ppm. e. Amines within FDA limits. E. Open hydronic systems, including condenser fluid-cooler spray water, shall have the following water qualities: 1. Soluble Copper: Maintain a maximum value of [0.5 ppm of cycles 2. TDS: Maintain a maximum value of 10 ppm, depends upon LSI. 3. Microbiological Limits: a. Total Aerobic Plate Count:  Maintain a maximum value of [10,000] organisms/ml. b. Total Anaerobic Plate Count:  Maintain a maximum value of [50cells /ml or less. c. Nitrate Reducers:  Maintain a maximum value of 50 cells /ml or less d. Sulfate Reducers:  Maintain a maximum value of 50 cells /ml or less e. Iron Bacteria:  Maintain a maximum value of 50 cells /ml or less f. Polymer Testable:  Maintain a minimum value within 5+ ppm 2.06 MATERIALS A. CHEMICALS 1. Chemicals shall be as recommended by water-treatment system manufacturer that are compatible with piping system components and connected equipment. B. Manufacturers: 1. GE Water & Process Technologies: www.gewater.com. 2. Nalco, an Ecolab Company: www.nalco.com. 3. Chemtreat C. System Cleaner: 1. Manufacturers: a. GE Water & Process Technologies: www.gewater.com. b. Nalco, an Ecolab Company: www.nalco.com. c. Chemtreat 2. Liquid alkaline compound with emulsifying agents and detergents to remove grease and petroleum products; sodiumtripoly phosphate and sodium molybdate. 3. Biocide chlorine release agents such as sodium hypochlorite or calcium hypochlorite or microbiocides such as quarternary ammonia compounds, tributyltin oxide, methylene bis (thiocyanate). D. Closed System Treatment (Water): 1. Manufacturers: a. GE Water & Process Technologies: www.gewater.com. b. Nalco, an Ecolab Company: www.nalco.com. c. Chemtreat 2. Sequestering agent to reduce deposits and adjust pH; polyphosphate. 3. Corrosion inhibitors; boron-nitrite, sodium nitrite and borax, sodium totyltriazole, low molecular weight polymers, phosphonates, sodium molybdate, or sulphites. 4. Conductivity enhancers; phosphates or phosphonates. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  232500 -6  HVAC Water Treatment  E. Chilled water and hot water systems, treatment shall be as follows: 1. For pH range, refer to Treatment Schedule at end of this section. 2. Mixture of Molybdate, Silicate, Polymeric dispersant and Tolytriazole or equivalent non.ferrous inhibitor, maintaining minimum concentration as noted in Treatment schedule at end of this section.  The inhibitor shall maintain corrosion of steel and copper below 2 mils per year and 0.2 mils per year respectively. 3. Non-oxidizing, non-acidic and non-cationic biocide, glutaraldhyde or approved equal, to control total bacteria count below 1000 colonies per ml. 4. Preliminary work required, but is not limited to: a. Refer to the drawing for additional information and clarification b. Provide a training manual to include operating and maintenance procedures on equipment, chemical control limits, material safety data sheets, lay-up and start-up procedures. c. All steps in the following cleaning and treatment procedures must be accomplished in immediate succession with no delay. Provide overtime manpower to accomplish same. d. Leave all valve trains in place and open for cleaning and treatment procedures and hydrostatic testing. e. Install drain outlets at deadends, low points and heat exchangers. f. Insert temporary wire screens of 140 microns or 9/64 inch perforations at chiller inlets. Use a 50 micron bag in the sidestream bag filter. 5. Preliminary cleaning procedures: a. Remove all extraneous loose debris, construction material, trash and dirt from piping, filters and all equipment.  Remove as much dry material as possible, for this material prevents protective coating transfer to hard to reach portions of the system. b. Flush water fill line separately to drain.  If a new water line has been installed, be sure that rust and debris from it is not washed into the system. c. Fill the system piping and equipment with water and recirculate for one with the temporary bypasses at open positions. d. Turn on direct make-up and begin blowing down deadends, low points and y-strainers until water runs “city-water clean” as fast as make-up will allow. e. Remove all screens and strainers, clean and replace.  Flush all temporary bypasses. f. Add alkaline, non-foaming, non-chlorinated detergent disinfectant plus non-foaming wetting agent to remove cutting oil, excess pipe joint compound, fine solids and other materials at a dosage of 5 lbs per 100 gallons of system water. g. Recirculate for 4 to 8 hours. h. Turn on direct make-up and begin flushing all drain outlets, y-strainers, deadends and bypasses until water meets the following parameters: Iron levels within 1 ppm, conductivity within 10 mmhs, orthophosphate within 1 ppm and turbidity within 1 FTU. i. Isolate tower basins to carry out vacuuming and power spray washing of tower interior. Immediately begin the “pretreatment procedure”. 6. Pretreatment procedure: a. Fill the system piping and equipment with water while adding non-foaming, water-based lay-up inhibitors to protect the piping as per chemical manufacturer’s recommended dosage. b. Recirculate for 2 hours.  All heat exchangers and condensers must be off-line and with no heat load. c. Stop the pumps and secure the system for hydrostatic tests. d. If the hydrostatic test fails, refill the system and begin pretreatment procedures again from step “g”. e. After successful completion of the hydrostatic test, disconnect all apparatus and secure the system for the resumption of the pretreatment procedure. f. Begin flushing systems as fast as make-up will allow.  Continue until water is “city water clean”. g. Remove all screens, strainers and temporary bypasses.  Clean and replace screens and strainers immediately and begin the “passivation procedure”. 7. Passivation Procedure a. Fill the system piping and equipment with water while adding TWICE the regular amount of the maintenance corrosion inhibitor into the water. b. Recirculate for 24-72 hours. c. Change the filter bag to a 10 micron high efficiency bag. d. Keep pressure differential across the bag filter less than 15 psig by washing or replacing the filter bag. 8. Initial chilled water and hot water system treatment: a. Install corrosion coupons and 5 micron, high-efficiency filter bag in the sidestream filter. b. Test water for corrosion inhibitor level.  Add corrosion inhibitor if necessary to restore the regular control range. c. Add biocide per water treatment contractor’s recommended dosage. d. Record make-up water meter reading. 9. Chilled water and hot water maintenance: a. Dose system with corrosion inhibitor based on test results and water meter readings. b. Remove corrosion coupons on a quarterly basis. c. Change the filter bags on pressure differential and flow meter readings. d. Test water monthly for pH, alkalinity, ammonia, hardness, molybdates, silicates, iron, copper, conductivity, total bacteria, turbidity, iron bacteria and sulfur reducing bacteria. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  232500 -7  HVAC Water Treatment  F. Glycol( chilled, condenser or hot water) systems shall be treated as such: 1. For pH range, refer to treatment schedule at the end of this section. 2. Mixture of phosphates, polymeric dispersant and tolytriazole or equivalent non-ferrous inhibitor with [40%] propylene glycol, premixed with deionized water.  The inhibitor shall maintain corrosion of steel and copper below 2 mils per year and 0.2 mils per year respectively. 3. Preliminary work required, but is not limited to: a. Refer to the drawing for additional information and clarification b. Provide a training manual to include operating and maintenance procedures on equipment, chemical control limits, material safety data sheets, lay-up and start-up procedures. c. All steps in the following treatment procedures must be accomplished in immediate succession with no delay. Provide overtime manpower to accomplish same. d. Leave all valve trains in place and open for cleaning and treatment procedures and hydrostatic testing. e. Install drain outlets at deadends, low points and chillers. f. Insert temporary bypasses at heat exchangers.  Use a 50 micron bag in the sidestream bag filter. g. Preliminary cleaning procedures: h. Remove all extraneous loose debris, construction material, trash and dirt from piping, filters and all equipment.  Remove as much dry material as possible, for this material prevents protective coating transfer to hard to reach portions of the system. i. Flush water fill line separately to drain.  If a new water line has been installed, be sure that rust and debris from it is not washed into the system. j. Fill the system piping and equipment with water and recirculate for one with the temporary bypasses at open positions. k. Turn on direct make-up and begin blowing down deadends, low points and y-strainers until water runs “city-water clean” as fast as make-up will allow. l. Remove all screens and strainers, clean and replace.  Flush all temporary bypasses. m. Add alkaline, non-foaming, non-chlorinated detergent disinfectant plus non-foaming wetting agent to remove cutting oil, excess pipe joint compound, fine solids and other materials at a dosage of 5 lbs per 100 gallons of system water. n. Recirculate for 4 to 8 hours. o. Turn on direct make-up and begin flushing all drain outlets, y-strainers, deadends and bypasses until water meets the following parameters: Iron levels within 1 ppm, conductivity within 10 mmhs, orthophosphate within 1 ppm and turbidity within 1 FTU. p. Isolate tower basins to carry out vacuuming and power spray washing of tower interior. Immediately begin the “pretreatment procedure”. 4. Pretreatment procedure: a. Fill the system piping and equipment with water while adding non-foaming, water-based lay-up inhibitors to protect the piping as per chemical manufacturer’s recommended dosage. b. Recirculate for 2 hours.  All heat exchangers and condensers must be off-line and with no heat load. c. Stop the pumps and secure the system for hydrostatic tests. d. If the hydrostatic test fails, refill the system and begin pretreatment procedures again from step “g”. e. After successful completion of the hydrostatic test, disconnect all apparatus and secure the system for the resumption of the pretreatment procedure. f. Begin flushing systems as fast as make-up will allow.  Continue until water is “city water clean”. g. Remove all screens, strainers and temporary bypasses.  Clean and replace screens and strainers immediately and begin the “passivation procedure”. 5. Passivation Procedure a. Fill the system piping and equipment with water while adding TWICE the regular amount of the maintenance corrosion inhibitor into the water. b. Recirculate for 24-72 hours. c. Change the filter bag to a 10 micron high efficiency bag. d. Keep pressure differential across the bag filter less than 15 psig by washing or replacing the filter bag. e. Purge all residual solution with clean compressed air or nitrogen. 6. Initial glycol water system treatment: a. Install corrosion coupons and 5 micron, high-efficiency filter bag in the sidestream filter. b. Fill system with inhibited propylene glycol solution from ground level to purge air at high points. c. Test water for corrosion inhibitor and glycol levels.  Add corrosion inhibitor/glycol if necessary to restore the regular control range. d. Record make-up water meter reading. 7. Glycol water maintenance: a. Dose system with inhibited glycol based on test results and system pressure. b. Prohibit adding city water to the system. c. Change the filter bags on pressure differential and flow meter readings. d. Test water monthly for pH, alkalinity, ammonia, hardness, phosphates, iron, copper, conductivity, turbidity, freezing point, propylene glycol and azoles. 8. Examine corrosion coupons on quarterly basis to report weight gain and weight loss. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  232500 -8  HVAC Water Treatment  2.07 BY-PASS (POT) FEEDER A. Manufacturers: 1. Griswold Controls: www.griswoldcontrols.com. 2. J. L. Wingert Company: www.jlwingert.com. 3. Neptune, a brand of the Dover Company: www.neptune1.com. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  232500 -9  HVAC Water Treatment  B. 6.0 gal quick opening cap for working pressure of 175 psi. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 PREPARATION A. Systems shall be operational, filled, started, and vented prior to cleaning. Use water meter to record capacity in each system. B. Place terminal control valves in open position during cleaning. C. Verify that electric power is available and of the correct characteristics. 3.02 CLEANING SEQUENCE A. Concentration: 1. As recommended by manufacturer. B. Hot Water Heating Systems: 1. Apply heat while circulating, slowly raising temperature to 160 degrees F and maintain for 12 hours minimum. 2. Remove heat and circulate to 100 degrees F or less; drain systems as quickly as possible and refill with clean water. 3. Circulate for 6 hours at design temperatures, then drain. 4. Refill with clean water and repeat until system cleaner is removed. C. Chilled Water Systems: 1. Circulate for 48 hours, then drain systems as quickly as possible. 2. Refill with clean water, circulate for 24 hours, then drain. 3. Refill with clean water and repeat until system cleaner is removed. D. Use neutralizer agents on recommendation of system cleaner supplier and approval of Architect. E. Flush open systems and glycol filled closed systems with clean water for one hour minimum. Drain completely and refill. F. Remove, clean, and replace strainer screens. G. Inspect, remove sludge, and flush low points with clean water after cleaning process is completed. Include disassembly of components as required. H. Remove all cleaning chemicals, additives and treatment chemicals from the site and dispose of in accordance with all environmental regulations. 3.03 INSTALLATION A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Install chemical application equipment on concrete bases, level and plumb.  Maintain manufacturer's recommended clearances.  Arrange units so controls and devices that require servicing are accessible. Anchor chemical tanks and floor-mounting accessories to substrate. C. Install water testing equipment on wall near water chemical application equipment. D. Install interconnecting control wiring for chemical treatment controls and sensors. E. Mount sensors and injectors in piping circuits. F. Bypass Feeders:  Install in closed hydronic systems, including [hot-water heating][chilled water][dual-temperature water][and][glycol cooling], and equipped with the following: 1. Install bypass feeder in a bypass circuit around circulating pumps, unless otherwise indicated on Drawings. 2. Install water meter in makeup water supply. 3. Install test-coupon assembly in bypass circuit around circulating pumps, unless otherwise indicated on Drawings. 4. Install a gate or full-port ball isolation valves on inlet, outlet, and drain below feeder inlet. 5. Install a swing check on inlet after the isolation valve. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  232500 -10  HVAC Water Treatment  G. Install automatic chemical-feed equipment for steam boiler and steam condensate systems and include the following: 1. Install makeup water softener. 2. Install water meter in makeup water supply. 3. Install inhibitor injection pumps and solution tanks with injection timer sensing contacts in water meter. 4. Pumps shall operate for timed interval when contacts close at water meter in makeup water supply connection.  Injection pump shall discharge into boiler feedwater tank or feedwater supply connection at boiler. 5. Install test equipment and furnish test-kit to Owner. 6. Install inhibitor injection timer with injection pumps and solution tanks. a. Pumps shall operate for timed interval on contact closure at water meter in makeup water supply connection.  Injection pump shall discharge into main steam supply header. H. Install automatic chemical-feed equipment for [condenser][fluid-cooler spray] water and include the following: 1. Install makeup water softener. 2. Install water meter in makeup water supply. 3. Install inhibitor injection pumps and solution tanks with injection timer sensing contacts in water meter. a. Pumps shall operate for timed interval on contact closure at water meter in makeup water supply connection.  Injection pump shall discharge into boiler feedwater tank or feedwater supply connection at boiler. 4. Install test equipment and provide test-kit to Owner.  Install test-coupon assembly in bypass circuit around circulating pumps, unless otherwise indicated on Drawings. 5. Install TDS controller with sensor and bleed valves. a. Bleed valves shall cycle to maintain maximum TDS concentration 6. Install pH sensor and controller with injection pumps and solution tanks. a. Injector pumps shall operate to maintain required pH. 7. Install biocide feeder alternating timer with two sets of injection pumps and solution tanks. a. Injection pumps shall operate to feed biocide on an alternating basis. 3.04 CLOSED SYSTEM TREATMENT A. Provide one bypass feeder on each system. Install isolating and drain valves and necessary piping. Install around balancing valve downstream of circulating pumps unless indicated otherwise. B. Introduce closed system treatment through bypass feeder when required or indicated by test. C. Provide 3/4 inch water coupon rack around circulating pumps with space for 4 test specimens. 3.05 CONNECTIONS A. Coordinate piping installations and specialty arrangements with schematics on Drawings and with requirements specified in piping systems.  If Drawings are explicit enough, these requirements may be reduced or omitted. B. Piping installation requirements are specified in other Division 23 Sections.  Drawings indicate general arrangement of piping, fittings, and specialties. C. Install piping adjacent to equipment to allow service and maintenance. D. Make piping connections between HVAC water-treatment equipment and dissimilar-metal piping with dielectric fittings.  Dielectric fittings are specified in Division 23 Section "Common Work Results for HVAC." 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  232500 -11  HVAC Water Treatment  E. Refer to Division 22 Section "Domestic Water Piping Specialties" for backflow preventers required in makeup water connections to potable-water systems. F. Confirm applicable electrical requirements in Division 26 Sections for connecting electrical equipment. G. Ground equipment according to Division 26 Section "Grounding and Bonding for Electrical Systems." H. Connect wiring according to Division 26 Section "Low-Voltage Electrical Power Conductors and Cables." 3.06 CLOSEOUT ACTIVITIES A. Training: Train Owner's personnel on operation and maintenance of chemical treatment system. 1. Provide minimum of two hours of instruction for two people. 2. Have operation and maintenance data prepared and available for review during training. 3. Conduct training using actual equipment after treated system has been put into full operation. 3.07 MAINTENANCE A. Perform maintenance work using competent and qualified personnel under the supervision and in the direct employ of the equipment manufacturer or original installer. B. Provide service and maintenance of treatment systems for one year from Date of Substantial Completion. C. Provide monthly technical service visits to perform field inspections and make water analysis on-site. Detail findings in writing on proper practices, chemical treating requirements, and corrective actions needed. Submit two copies of field service report after each visit. D. Provide laboratory and technical assistance services during this maintenance period. E. Provide on-site inspections of equipment during scheduled or emergency shutdown to properly evaluate success of water treatment program, and make recommendations in writing based upon these inspections. END OF SECTION 232500 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  232500 -12  HVAC Water Treatment  SECTION 235700 HEAT EXCHANGERS FOR HVAC PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Plate type heat exchangers. 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Section 230500 -Common Work Results for HVAC 1.03 REFERENCE STANDARDS A. AHRI Directory of Certified Product Performance -Air-Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Institute (AHRI); current edition at www.ahrinet.org. B. ASME BPVC-VIII-1 -Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Section VIII, Division 1: Rules for Construction of Pressure Vessels; 2019. 1.04 SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: Includerated capacities, operating characteristics, empty and flooded weights, quantity and materials of shell, tubes, plate and frame, gasket material, overall dimensions, anchor bolt locations, location and size of each field connection, furnished specialties, and accessories. B. Coordination Drawings: Equipment room, drawn to scale, on which the following items are shown and coordinated with each other, based on input from installers of the items involved: 1. Tube-removal space. 2. Structural members to which heat exchangers will be attached. C. Certificates: Certify that Products meet or exceed specified requirements. D. Manufacturer's Instructions: Indicate installation and support requirements. E. Operation and Maintenance Data: Include start up and shut down instructions, assembly drawings, and spare parts lists. F. Warranty: Submit manufacturer's warranty and ensure forms have been completed in Owner's name and registered with manufacturer. G. Maintenance Materials: Furnish the following for Owner's use in maintenance of project. 1. See Section 016000 -Product Requirements, for additional provisions. 2. Extra Gaskets: One set of each type and size. 1.05 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Protect internals from entry of foreign material by temporary caps on flanged openings. 1.06 WARRANTY A. Provide five year manufacturer warranty for ________. 1.07 QUALITY ASSUARANCE A. Product Options: Drawings indicate size, profiles, performance, and dimensional requirements of heat exchangers and are based on the specific equipment installed. Refer to Dvision 01 Section "Product Requirements." B. ASME Compliance: Fabricate and label heat exchangers to comply with ASME BPVC-VIII-1. Furnish a U-1 form and picture of the nameplate. C. AHRI Certification: Heat exchangers shall be certified according to ANSI/AHRI Standard 400 and listed on the AHRI Directory of Certified Product Performance D. Registration: Fabricate and label shell-and-tube heat exchangers to comply with the Tubular Exchanger Manufacturers Association's standards. PART 2 PRODUCTS 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  235700 -1  Heat Exchangers for HVAC  2.01 SHELL AND TUBE TYPE HEAT EXCHANGER A. Manufacturers: 1. Armstrong Pumps Inc; ______: www.armstrongpumps.com. 2. Baltimore Aircoil Company; ______: www.baltimoreaircoil.com. 3. Bell & Gossett, a xylem brand; ______: www.bellgossett.com. 4. TACO Comfort Solutions, Inc; https://www.tacocomfort.com/ B. Comply with ASME BPVC-VIII-1 for manufacture of tubular heat exchangers and heat exchanger shells. C. Fabricate and label shell-and-tube heat exchangers to comply with Tubular Exchanger Manufacturers Association Standards, 10th Edition." D. Tubes: U-tube type with 3/4 inch OD minimum seamless copper tubes suitable for 125 psi working pressure. E. Shell: Steel pipe with flanged piping connections and necessary tappings, steel saddle and attaching U-bolts, prime coated. F. Heads: Cast iron or fabricated steel, flanged or bolted to the shell with steel or bronze tube sheets and baffles, flanged tappings for piping connections. G. Piping Connections: Factory fabricated of materials compatible with heat-exchanger shell. Flanged ends in accordance with ASME B16.5 for steel and stainless steel flanges. Attach tappings to shell before testing and labeling.. H. Water Chamber and Tube Bundle: Removable for inspection and cleaning. I. Support Saddles: 1. Fabricated of material similar to shell. 2. Foot mounted with provision for anchoring to support. 3. Fabricate attachment of saddle supports to pressure vessel with reinforcement strong enough to resist heat-exchanger movement during a seismic even when heat-exchanger saddles are anchored to building structure. J. Design: Heating fluid in shell and heated fluid in tubes. 2.02 PLATE AND FRAME TYPE HEAT EXCHANGER A. Manufacturers: 1. Alfa Laval; ______: www.alfalaval.com. 2. Armstrong Pumps Inc; ______: www.armstrongpumps.com. 3. Bell & Gossett, a xylem brand; ______: www.bellgossett.com. 4. Plate Concepts; http://www.plateconcepts.com/ B. Comply with ASME BPVC-VIII-1 for manufacture of plate and frame type heat exchangers. C. Provide plate heat exchanger with ASME U Stamp D. Configuration: Freestanding assembly consisting of frame support, top and bottom carrying and guide bars, fixed and moveable end plates, tie rods, individually removeable plates, and one-piece gaskets. The plate heat exchangers shall not use more than 30% of the allowed pressure drop in the ports and port entry area and port velocities shall not exceed 16 FPS. E. Frames: 1. Single pass design with all connections on the head end (fixed pressure plate). 2. Head (fixed pressure plate) and follower (loose pressure plate) shall be constructured of carbon steel in sufficient and strength to operate within the designed and test pressures without welded reinforcements or stiffeners. 3. Lifting connections designed to support the entire flooded weight of the plate heat exchanger shall be included on all heat exchangers with 4" connections or greater. 4. Capacity to accomodate 20% additional plates. 5. Painted carbon stell with provisions for anchoring to support. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  235700 -2  Heat Exchangers for HVAC  F. Top and Bottom Carrying and Guide Bars: Painted carbon steel, or stainless steel. 1. Fabricate attachment of heat-exchanger carrying and guide bars with reinforcement strong enough to resist heat-exchanger movement during a seismic event when heat-exchanger carrying and guide bars are anchored to building structure. G. Tightening Bolts: 1. Frame tightening bolts, zinc plated, constructed of SA193 B7 with SA194 B2H nuts, mechanically retained to prevent accidental side removal. Tightening bolts equipped with a captive nut at the head (fixed pressure plate) and a keyed working nut at the follower (loose pressure plate) to allow for easy opening and closing of the plate heat exchanger. 2. Thrust bushings with bearing box washers shall be located at all critical closing bolts on plate heat exchangers with connection sizes larger than 6”. The thrust bushings allow for easy opening and closing of the plate heat exchanger without damaging the epoxy coating of the follower (fixed pressure plate). 3. The bolting system shall be designed so that only four (4) main tightening bolts are required for the opening and closing of a plate heat exchanger. H. Plate Requirements: 1. Heat transfer plates shall be pressed from a homogeneous single metal sheet in one step. No multi-stage pressing of one sheet is allowed. No additional material should be added to the single metal plate sheet e.g. local reinforcements in hanger area or in gasket grooves. No welding allowed on plates. 2. Heat transfer plates shall be pressed using solid film type press lubrication. No oil or other lubrication shall be allowed on the plate surface during pressing due to potential contamination of the working fluids in the finished plate heat exchanger. 3. Heat transfer plates shall be permanently marked to identify material and origin. 4. Plate alignment shall be maintained mechanically by the use of self-aligning dimples on the heat transfer plates in order to ensure plate to plate alignment as well as by top and bottom carrying bars in the frame in order to ensure plate to frame alignment. Together these two alignment mechanisms will minimize the horizontal and vertical movement of the plates as well as ensure maximum gasket contact under pressure. 5. Provide plate heat exchanger selected to exhibit 50 Pa wall shear stress at required pressure drop. I. Gaskets: Nitrile Rubber J. Gasket Requirements: 1. connection points to provide a secure attachment for the gasket that will not shear off the 2. Gasketing systems shall be non-glued. No special tools shall be required to attach the gasket. The heat transfer plate of a lock-in gasket shall be designed with rolled connection points to provide a secure attachment for the gasket that will not shear off the 3. Gaskets must include color coded tabs that protrude past the perimeter of the heat transfer plate in order to allow positive identification of the gasket material without opening the heat exchanger. 4. Gaskets shall include alignment shoulders to assist heat transfer plate alignment. K. Piping Connections: 1. Threaded male NPT pipe connection for NPS 2 and smaller. For larger sizes, furnish end-plate port with threaded studs connections conforming to ANSI B16.5 suitable for flanged connection. 2. End plate with welded carbon-steel nozzles. Threaded male NPT pipe connection for NPS 2 and smaller; carbon-steel flanged pipe connection for larger sizes. 3. Connections shall be clearly marked on the plate exchanger and shall correspond to approved vendor drawings. L. Enclose entire heat exchanger (plates and frame) in a solid aluminum removable shroud and insulation meeting specification requirements. 2.03 PACKAGED RUN-AROUND HEATING AND ENERGY RECOVERY SYSTEM (ERS) 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  235700 -3  Heat Exchangers for HVAC  A. Manufacturer: Konvekta USA Inc. B. General 1. Provide a fully piped and fully functional run-around energy recovery system, consisting of factory-fabricated hydronic modules and supply air and exhaust air heat exchanger coils with “summer”, “winter” and “transition” operating point performance. 2. Performance to be indicated on the submitted coil schedule technical data sheets. 3. Heat exchanger coil sizing and performance shall be according to submitted coil schedule technical data sheets. The coil performance shall meet or exceed the energy transfer values, at the summer, winter and transition design conditions. 4. The coil air pressure drop shall not exceed the air side pressure drop listed on the schedule at the design volume flow. C. Heat Exchangers Coils 1. Heat exchanger coils shall be "micro" type with 20 mm diameter steel tubes with wall thickness of 1.0 mm mechanically expanded into 0.4 mm thick aluminum fins and corrosion resistant coated steel headers. 2. The coils shall be designed to accommodate multiple passes and to allow for maximum energy transfer between the fluid and the air at all operating conditions. 3. The coil frames shall be continuously welded of stainless steel, with a polyethylene coating added between the frame and the fins. 4. The coils and headers shall be epoxy coated, UV-resistant and applied to all metallic surfaces, 5. The coils shall be hydronically pressure tested at 500 psi for a period of not less than 5 contiguous days, prior to shipment from factory. 6. The coils shall include neoprene sealing strips located between casing channels and fins along top and bottom to arrest air bypass and water carryover. 7. The coils shall be fully drainable. 8. The coils shall be cleanable with high pressure water (up to 2600 psi), low-pressure steam, compressed air, hot water and detergent without degrading efficiency. 9. The coils shall be warrantied by the manufacturer against mechanical defects for a period of 5 years, from the date of manufacture. D. Hydronic Module(s) 1. The hydronic module shall be prefabricated with the following components as minimum but not limited to, and installed/piped/wired and factory tested, unless noted as field installed: a. 1 Centrifugal pump plus 1 centrifugal redundancy pump including high efficiency pump motors, vibration dampers, shut-off valves, discharge soft-seat check valves, Y-strainers, and a variable frequency drive for each pump b. For steam-source supplemental heating: 1) Two Shell & Tube heat exchangers for steam-source supplemental heating. 2) One heat exchanger shall be 100% redundant 3) Two Float & Thermostatic Steam Traps for steam-source supplemental heating. c. For water-source supplemental heating and cooling: 1) Two Plate Heat exchangers for supplemental heating. 2) Four Plate Heat exchangers for supplemental cooling 3) One heat exchanger of each type shall be 100% redundant d. One bladder type membrane expansion tank including check valves and pressure gauge e. One air and dirt separator f. One Drain ball-valve g. One Filling nozzle h. One Automatic bypass valve for propylene glycol protection loop i. Two Fluid pressure transmitters j. Two Safety relief valves k. Eight Automatic zone control valves, (field installed/piped/wired) l. Eight Fluid flow meters, (field installed/piped/wired) m. Eight Immersion pockets with PT100 temperature sensors built in, (field installed/piped/wired) n. Controller hardware, software and electrical cabinet o. Digital manual control modules p. Analog manual control modules q. UPS – Maintenance free Uninterruptible Power supply r. Graphical User Interface 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  235700 -4  Heat Exchangers for HVAC  2. All components shall be factory labeled and/or tagged. In additional all field piping connection points shall be labeled. 3. The hydronic module shall be delivered without piping insulation. Insulation to be provided and field installed by others. 4. A factory trained technician shall perform a factory acceptance test of the hydronic module prior to shipment from the fabrication facility. The factory acceptance test should include pressure testing of the module at 300psi for a period of no less than 24 contiguous hours. a. If the hydronic module is constructed in multiple sections, the onsite contractor shall reassemble and/or reconnect the individual sections under supervision of a factory trained technician. 5. Onsite contractor, under supervision of a factory trained technician, to inspect all hydronic module screw and flange fittings for leaks, during pressurization of the system, and re-tighten connections as needed. 6. Acceptable manufacturers of the hydronic module sub-components shall be as follows: a. Centrifugal pumps -Grundfos b. Centrifugal pump high efficiency motors – Baldor c. Pump variable frequency drives – Grundfos d. Fluid balancing valves -Oventrop e. Shell & Tube heat exchangers – Bell & Gossett f. Float & Thermostatic Steam Trap -Armstrong g. Plate heat exchangers -SWEP h. Membrane expansion tank -Xylem Inc. i. Air and dirt separator – Rolairtrol by Xylem Inc. j. Safety relief valves – Kunkle series by Emerson k. Automatic bypass valve for anti-freeze protection loop -Belimo l. Fluid pressure transmitters – Ifm Efector, inc. m. Automatic zone control valves -Belimo n. Fluid flow meter – Belimo FM series o. Immersion pockets with PT100 temperature sensors built in – Ifm Efector, inc. p. Controller hardware and software – Beckhoff q. Digital manual control modules -WAGO r. Analog manual control modules -WAGO s. BACnet gateway – Fieldserver Technologies (if BACnet MSTP) or Beckhoff (if BACnet IP) t. UPS – Maintenance free Uninterruptible Power supply -Siemens u. Graphical User Interface – Bachmann E. Energy Recovery System (ERS) Controller 1. The ERS controller shall be installed inside an electrical enclosure included as part of the prefabricated hydronic module assembly. The controller to be provided with the hardware and software necessary for demand-dependent regulation of the entire energy recovery system and its components. 2. A local 15.6” diagonal display with 1920 x 1080 resolution shall be provided and mounted on the face of the electrical cabinet for monitoring of energy efficiency, temperatures, volumetric flows. 3. The controller shall be capable of performing the following functions: a. Primary function: heat (winter operation) or pre-cool (summer operation) supply air to supply air set temperature b. Continuous measurement and recording of system operating parameters c. Starting/shutting down pumps and regulating flow rate (pump speed) for optimal energy recovery d. Minimizing pump power demand (flow rate increases only if additional pump power demand is smaller than marginal energy recovery) e. When reaching/exceeding supply air temperature (set-point provided by BMS), the energy recovery system is turned down f. Freeze protection at exhaust air heat exchangers 4. The control software shall be based on a simulation/optimization algorithms using the supply air temperature setpoints as command signals, the glycol/water temperatures and volumes associated with the supply air heat exchangers (coils) as the actuating variables and air handling unit air volumes, outside air temperature and exhaust air temperatures as disturbance variables. The simulation algorithm continuously calculates the theoretical system performance (energy recovery efficiency) based on all control variables, the heat exchanger (coil) performance curves and the measured glycol/water volumes pumped through each supply and exhaust air handling unit. The optimization algorithm then sets the actuating variables based on the simulated optimal system performance. 5. The ERS controller hardware shall include manual analog and digital output modules which allow for local manual override and positioning of all controller outputs. The override module should include a red LED to indicate a manual override has been initiated. 6. The following ERS controller input signals external to the hydronic module shall be provided and installed by others: a. Software points provided by BMS via BACnet interface: 1) Operating mode (heating or cooling operation) 2) Supply air temp. setpoint leaving the ERS coils for each supply air handler b. Field hardware provided and installed by BMS, communicated to ERS via BACnet interface: 1) Air volumes in each supply and exhaust air handler 2) Air temperature before each supply coil bank 3) Air temperature before and after each exhaust coil bank 4) Supply and exhaust fan status c. Field hardware provided by ERS manufacturer, installed and hardwired to ERS control cabinet by BMS: 1) Field installed flow control valves, fluid temperature sensors and flow meters as shown on attached PID d. Field hardware provided, installed and hardwired to ERS control cabinet by BMS: 1) Air temperature after each supply coil bank. e. The following additional ERS controller or hydronic module requirements shall be provided and installed by others: 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  235700 -5  Heat Exchangers for HVAC  1) VPN access to the ERS controller provided by owner. 2) (4) four IP drops and addresses 3) The system control cabinet requires one power supply line (460V/3-phase). F. General Coordination with Mechanical, BMS, Owner and other contractors and suppliers – (Items not included in ERS manufacturer scope of work) 1. Install of heat exchangers (coils) and hydronic module in compliance with system manufacturer’s installation guidelines by others. 2. Piping between hydronic module and coils by others. 3. Flushing of piping, to remove any debris prior to filling system with premixed Propylene Glycol / Water mixture, using a contractor provided pump, by others. a. Energy recovery pumps are not to be used for the purpose of flushing and filling system. b. Contractor to provide temporary piping, as needed, to bypass all ERS manufacturer coils and hydronic modules while flushing the system piping. c. All piping shall be blown-out with compressed air after the system is flushed. Any water introduced into the ERS coils or hydronic module piping as a result of the flushing process, must also be blown out immediately, in order to prevent freezing and to ensure the water/glycol mixture and its inhibitors are not diluted. 4. Glycol feed system provided by others. 5. Air temperature sensor after each supply ERS coil bank, to be provided, installed and hardwired to the ERS control panel, by others. Sensor shall be a 3-wire, 100 ohm averaging duct sensor with 385 platinum curve characteristic. Select capillary length based on cross sectional area of duct where the sensor will be installed. 6. Installation and wiring of all ERS manufacturer field devices, including flow control valves, fluid temperature sensors and fluid flow meters by others 7. VPN access to ERS system controller to be provided two weeks in advance of initial system start-up, by others. 8. Installation of BACnet communication cable between ERS electrical/control cabinet and BMS, by others. 9. All field wiring and piping, provided and installed by others. 10. ERS Coil racks, provided and installed by others. 11. IP network cabling to ERS controller, provided and installed by others. 12. Air vents upstream and downstream of ERS Coils and at high points of piping, provided and installed by others. 13. ERS Coil condensate drain pans on both supply and exhaust coil banks by others. 14. ERS Coil isolation valves by others. 15. Hydronic module piping insulation (to be installed after completion of start-up), provided and installed by others. 16. Supply and exhaust airflow monitoring stations, provided and installed by others. 17. Piping and wiring between pumping and steam heat exchanger sections of hydronic module, by others. 18. Premixed (30%) Propylene glycol mixture, including 10% of estimated system volume available as spare fill at time of initial start-up, to be used as needed during venting of system. Only glycol with corrosion protection inhibitors designed for a service life of 10 years and matched to the materials used for the Energy Recovery System should be provided. Different glycol brands and products should not be mixed, but rather a single brand and type of glycol should be used to assure compatibility. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  235700 -6  Heat Exchangers for HVAC  G. System Start-up 1. Remote functional inspection of system controller via VPN approximately two weeks before start-up. 2. On-site start-up by factory trained technician: a. Review/inspection of heat exchanger and piping installation b. Review/inspection of sensors and valves installation c. Inspection/programming of pump frequency converters d. Functional testing of valves and frequency converters e. Testing of interface with Building Management System f. Instruction/training of owner’s operating/maintenance staff for a period of 4 working hours at project work site. 3. Mechanical, TAB, Electrical, HVAC and BMS contractors and/or suppliers to coordinate with and support start-up process performed by ERS manufacturer representatives. H. Remote Monitoring, Automatic Reporting, Optimization and Support 1. Remote monitoring and optimization of system parameters and performance shall be completed by the ERS Manufacturer during the first year of operation (via VPN). Many system malfunctions or errors (such as installation or wiring errors, erroneous set values, etc.) can only be detected by monitoring the dynamic system operation. Target values are calculated by means of a system-specific simulation program (built in the system controller), utilizing the measured air temperatures, volumes and the performance curves/maps of heat exchangers, pumps and valves. [if !supportLineBreakNewLine] 2. Dynamic operations data, static measurements and computed values are made available to the owner via Internet access. Automatic reporting includes: [if !supportLineBreakNewLine] a. Calculation and comparison of Target/Actual energy recovered b. Monitoring of important functions and components of the system c. Display and cause-analysis of malfunctions or deviations from target values [if !supportLineBreakNewLine] 3. An ERS factory trained technician shall be available to the building owner or designated representative, 24 hours per day, 365 days per year, via an ERS manufacturer provided toll free phone number, for technical support requirements during the warranty period. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  235700 -7  Heat Exchangers for HVAC  I. System Guarantee & Verification 1. Manufacturer shall assume responsibility for the optimal and malfunction-free operation of the energy recovery system during the first year of operation and shall guarantee the system efficiency and/or energy recovery rates at the specified operating conditions. 2. Manufacturer shall provide the following first year performance information, for review by owner or owner’s representative: a. Verification of guaranteed efficiency and/or heat recovery rate b. Verification of optimal and malfunction-free operation of the entire energy recovery system c. Verification of total energy saved/recovered, corresponding to calculated target values J. Maintenance 1. The system controller shall alert the operating staff of pending routine maintenance (e.g. pump routine maintenance). PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 EXAMINATION A. Examine areas for compliance with requirements for installation tolerances and for structural rigidity, strength, anchors, and other conditions affecting performance of heat exchangers. 1. Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected. 3.02 INSTALLATION A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Heat exchangers shall be flushed clean at the factory prior to shipment. All connections shall be factory sealed to prevent the entrance of foreign material during transit. C. Install to permit removal of tube bundle with minimum disturbance to installed equipment and piping. D. Install shell-and-tube heat exchangers on saddle supports. E. Install plate and frame heat exchangers on concrete base. Concrete base is specified in Section 230500 -Common Work Results for HVAC, and concrete materials and installation requiremetns are specified in Division 03. F. Anchor heat exchangers on concrete housekeeping pad. 1. Install dowel rods to connect concrete base to concrete floor. Unless otherwise indicated, install dowel rods on 18 inch centers around full perimeter of base. 2. For supported equipment, install epoxy-coated anchor bolts that extend through concrete base and anchor into structural concrete floor. 3. Place and secure anchorage devices. Use setting drawings, templates, diagrams, instructions, and directions furnished with items to be embedded. 4. Install anchor bolts to elevations required for proper attachment to supported equipment. 5. Cast-in-place concrete materials and placement requirements are specified in Division 03. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  235700 -8  Heat Exchangers for HVAC  G. Pitch shell to completely drain condensate. H. Pipe drain valves to nearest floor drain. 3.03 CONNECTIONS A. Piping installation requirements are specified in other Division 23 Sections. Drawings indicate general arrangement of piping, fittings, and specialties. B. Maintain manufacturer's recommended clearances for service and maintenance. Install piping connections to allow service and maintenance of heat exchangers. C. Install shutoff valves at heat-exchanger inlet and outlet connections. D. Install relief valves on heat-exchanger heated-fluid connection and install pipe relief valves, full size of valve connection, to floor drain. E. Pipe relief valves for steam generators to the outside. F. Install vacuum breaker at heat-exchanger steam inlet connection. G. Install hose end valve to drain shell. 3.04 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Test and adjust controls and safeties. Replace damaged and malfunctioning controls and equipment. 3.05 CLEANING A. After completing system installation, including outlet fitting and devices, inspect exposed finish. Remove burrs, dirt, and construction debris and repair damaged fittings. 3.06 DEMONSTRATION A. Engage a factory-authorized service representative to train Owner's maintenance personnel to adjust, operate, and maintain heat exchangers. Provide minimum 8 hours on-site training. Refer to Section 230400 Demonstration and Training. END OF SECTION 235700 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  235700 -9  Heat Exchangers for HVAC  SECTION 236213 PACKAGED AIR-COOLED REFRIGERANT COMPRESSOR AND CONDENSER UNITS PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Condensing unit package. B. Charge of refrigerant and oil. C. Controls and control connections. D. Refrigerant piping connections. E. Motor starters. F. Electrical power connections. 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Section 230513 -Common Motor Requirements for HVAC Equipment. B. Section 232300 -Refrigerant Piping. 1.03 REFERENCE STANDARDS A. AHRI 210/240 -Standard for Performance Rating of Unitary Air-Conditioning and Air-Source Heat Pump Equipment; 2008, Including All Addenda. B. ASHRAE Std 23.1 -Methods of Testing for Rating the Performance of Positive Displacement Refrigerant Compressors and Condensing Units that Operate at Subcritical Temperatures of the Refrigerant; 2010. C. ASHRAE Std 90.1 I-P -Energy Standard for Buildings Except Low-Rise Residential Buildings; Most Recent Edition Adopted by Authority Having Jurisdiction, Including All Applicable Amendments and Supplements. D. NEMA 250 -Enclosures for Electrical Equipment (1000 Volts Maximum); 2014. E. NFPA 70 -National Electrical Code; Most Recent Edition Adopted by Authority Having Jurisdiction, Including All Applicable Amendments and Supplements. 1.04 SUBMITTALS A. See Section 013000 -Administrative Requirements, for submittal procedures. B. Product Data: Provide rated capacities, weights specialties and accessories, electrical nameplate data, and wiring diagrams. Include equipment served by condensing units in submittal, or submit at same time, to ensure capacities are complementary. C. Shop Drawings: Indicate components, assembly, dimensions, weights and loadings, required clearances, and location and size of field connections. Include schematic layouts showing condensing units, cooling coils, refrigerant piping, and accessories required for complete system. D. Design Data: Indicate pipe and equipment sizing. E. Manufacturer's Instructions: Submit manufacturer's complete installation instructions. F. Operation and Maintenance Data: Include start-up instructions, maintenance instructions, parts lists, controls, and accessories. G. Warranty: Submit manufacturer's warranty and ensure forms have been filled out in Owner's name and registered with manufacturer. H. Maintenance Materials: Furnish the following for Owner's use in maintenance of project. 1. See Section 016000 -Product Requirements, for additional provisions. 2. Extra Lubricating Oil: One complete change. 1.05 QUALITY ASSURANCE 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  236213 -1  Packaged Air-Cooled Refrigerant Compressor and Condenser Units  A. Products Requiring Electrical Connection: Listed and classified by Underwriters Laboratories Inc. as suitable for the purpose specified and indicated. B. Products shall be designed, tested, rated and certified in accordance with, and installed in complaince with applicable sections of the following stanards and directives. 1. AHRI 550/590 – Performance Rating of Water-chilling and Heat Pump Water-heating Packages Using the Vapor Compression Cycle 2. AHRI 370 – Sound Rating of Large Outdoor Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning 3. ANSI/ASHRAE 15 – Safety Code for Mechanical Refrigeration 4. ANSI/ASHRAE 34 – Number Designation and Safety Classification of RefrigerantsASHRAE 90.1 – Energy Standard for Buildings Except Low-Rise Residential Buildings 5. ANSI/NFPA 70 – National Electrical Code (N.E.C.) 6. ASHRAE 90.1 – Energy Standard for Buildings Except Low-Rise Residential Buildings 7. UL 60335-1 – Safety of Household and Similar Electrical Appliances, Part 1: General Requirements 8. UL 60335-2-40 –Household And Similar Electrical Appliances – Safety – Part 2-40: Particular Requirements for Electrical Heat Pumps, Air-Conditioners and Dehumidifiers 9. OSHA – Occupational Safety and Health Act 10. Manufactured in facility registered to ISO 9001. C. ASHRAE 90.1 – Energy Standard for Buildings Except Low-Rise Residential Buildings D. Factory Run Test: Air-cooled chiller shall be pressure-tested, evacuated and fully charged with refrigerant and oil, and shall be factory operational run tested with water flowing through the vessel. E. Heat pump manufacturer shall have a factory trained and supported service organization. F. Warranty: Manufacturer shall warrant all equipment and material of its manufacture against defects in workmanship and material for a period of one year from date of initial start-up or eighteen (18) months from date of shipment, whichever occurs first. 1.06 SHORT CIRCUIT CURRENT RATING: A. All electrical equipment, starters and controller assemblies shall be provided with short circuit rating as follows: 1. Provide controllers with listed short circuit current rating not less than.100,000 AIC unless approved by the engineer based on submitted short circuit study. 2. Listed series ratings are acceptable, except where not permitted by motor contribution according to NFPA 70. 3. Label equipment utilizing series ratings as required by NFPA 70. 1.07 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Comply with manufacturer's installation instructions for rigging, unloading, and transporting units. B. Unit shall be delivered to job site fully assembled and charged with refrigerant and oil by the Manufacturer. C. Unit shall be stored and handled per Manufacturer’s instructions. D. Heat pumps shall be rigged and transported as specified by the following includiing but not limited to the Department Of Transportation and all AHJ's. 1.08 FACTORY WITNESS TEST A. Air source heat pumps shall be factory tested at project design conditions for both heating and cooling. Units shall be tested at 5 operating points: Min flow, 25%,50%75% and 100%. B. Manufacturer to provide alternate pricing to test (1) one complete module bank at the above test points indicated. Provided additional cost / lead time impacts vs testing an individual module. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  236213 -2  Packaged Air-Cooled Refrigerant Compressor and Condenser Units  C. In person factory witness test shall include (2) two Prudential team memebrs and (1) member of the design team. 1.09 WARRANTY A. See Section 017800 -Closeout Submittals, for additional warranty requirements. B. Provide a five year warranty to include coverage for refrigerant compressors. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 MANUFACTURERS A. York International Corporation/Johnson Controls, Inc: www.york.com. (Base) B. Trane, a brand of Ingersoll Rand: www.trane.com. C. Aermic 2.02 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. Refer to schedule on drawings for performance requirements. 2.03 MANUFACTURED UNITS A. Units: Self-contained, packaged, factory assembled and pre-wired units suitable for outdoor use consisting of cabinet, compressors, condensing coil and fans, integral sub-cooling coil, controls, liquid receiver, wind deflector, and screens. B. Description: Furnish, Install, and Commission factory assembled charged, and operational run tested AIR-COOLED MODULAR HEAT PUMPS as specified herein and shown on the Drawings. Heat pump shall include, but is not limited to: a complete system with multiple independent refrigerant circuits incl. 4-way-valve, DC inverter scroll compressors, brazed plate heat exchanger, air-cooled heat exchanger, refrigerant, interconnecting wiring, safety and operating controls and special features as specified herein or required for safe, automatic operation. C. 6” Structural Steel Base with Piping Supports and Plate Steel Lifting Lugs (Painted Finish) D. Walk-On Grating Installed Between Chiller Modules and Piping Extension 1. Alternate mafacturers may require addtional structural grating. E. Operation Characteristics 1. Ensure unit is capable of operation in cooling mode from -4°F to 118.4°F ambient temperature. 2. Ensure unit is capable of operation in cooling mode from -13°F to 109.4°F ambient temperature. 3. Cabinet: Unit panels, structural elements, control boxes and heavy gauge structural base shall be constructed of painted galvanized steel. All exposed sheet metal shall be coated with baked on power paint to meet 500-hour salt spray in accordance with the ASTM B117 standard. F. Construction and Ratings: In accordance with AHRI 210/240. Test in accordance with ASHRAE Std 23.1. G. Performance Ratings: Energy Efficiency Rating (EER) and Coefficient of Performance (COP) not less than prescribed by ASHRAE Std 90.1. 2.04 CASING A. House components in welded steel frame with galvanized steel panels with weather resistant, baked enamel finish. B. Mount starters, disconnects, and controls in weatherproof panel provided with full opening access doors. Provide mechanical interlock to disconnect power when door is opened. C. Provide removable access doors or panels with quick fasteners and piano hinges. 2.05 CONDENSER COILS 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  236213 -3  Packaged Air-Cooled Refrigerant Compressor and Condenser Units  A. Coils: Aluminum fins mechanically bonded to seamless copper tubing. Provide sub-cooling circuits. Air test under water to 650 psig, and vacuum dehydrate. Seal with holding charge of nitrogen. 2.06 FANS AND MOTORS A. Vertical discharge direct driven propeller type condenser fans with fan guard on discharge. Equip with roller or ball bearings with grease fittings extended to outside of casing. B. Weatherproof motors suitable for outdoor use, single phase permanent split capacitor or 3 phase, with permanent lubricated ball bearings and built in current and thermal overload protection. Refer to Section 230513. C. Fans assembly kits shall be composed of following components with their feature: 1. 2. EC Fan motors: High efficiency, direct drive, 3-phase, insulation class “F”, current protected, IP55, permanently-lubricated ball bearings. Brushless commutation and minimum self-heating 3. Fan housing: resistant, corrosion resistant, sendzimir galvanized and coated sheet steel with black plastic (RAL9005); optimized inlet ring and integrated diffuser for maximum efficiency and quiet operation 4. Guard grill: metal double coated with black plastic (RAL9005); protect motor against splash water, contact protection according to standard DIN EN ISO13857 D. Enclosure Type: Totally enclosed, fan cooled (TEFC) or Totally Enclosed Air Over (TEAO). 2.07 COMPRESSORS A. Compressor: Hermetic scroll type. 1. Direct Current inverter providing stepless capacity control 2. Enhanced vapor injection cycle with extended operation envelope 3. Non-contact seal design to diminish friction and improve reliability 4. 15 year design life, self-lubricating bearings 5. Internal check valve to reduce vibration 6. Internal pressure equalization valve to optimize part load efficiency B. Mounting: Statically and dynamically balance rotating parts and mount on rubber-in-shear vibration isolators or as per compressor manufacturers recommendations. C. Lubrication System: Reversible, positive displacement oil pump with oil charging valve, oil level sight glass, and magnetic plug or strainer. D. Motor: Constant speed 3600 rpm suction gas cooled with electronic sensor and winding over temperature protection, designed for across-the-line starting. Furnish with starter. E. Capacity Reduction Equipment: Suction valve unloaders, with lifting mechanism operated by electrically actuated solenoid valve, with unloaded compressor start; controlled from suction pressure. F. Sump Oil Heater: Evaporates refrigerant returning to sump during shut down. Energize heater continuously when compressor is not operating. 2.08 REFRIGERANT CIRCUIT A. Provide each unit with two independent refrigerant circuits, factory supplied and piped. Refer to Section 232300. B. For each refrigerant circuit, provide: 1. Filter dryer replaceable core type. 2. Liquid line sight glass and moisture indicator. 3. Thermal expansion valve for maximum operating pressure. 4. Insulated suction line. 5. Suction and liquid line service valves and gauge ports. 6. Liquid line solenoid valve. 7. Charging valve. 8. Discharge line check valve. 9. Compressor discharge service valve. 10. All pressure relief valves required. 11. 4-way valve 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  236213 -4  Packaged Air-Cooled Refrigerant Compressor and Condenser Units  12. suction pressure transducer 13. refrigerant reciever 14. discharge liquid seperator 15. Discharge service ball valve 16. liquid line charging port C. Each unit shall be equipped with an oil separator for DC inverter scroll compressor. D. For heat pump units, provide reversing valve, suction line accumulator, discharge muffler, flow control check valve, and solid-state defrost control utilizing thermistors. E. Provide compressor crankcase heaters for protection against liquid migration. Heat the compressor in the case of the standby when power on. 2.09 HEAT EXCHNAGERS A. Water side heat exchanger: 1. Water side heat exchanger shall be brazed-plate stainless steel construction capable of refrigerant working pressure of 638 psig (4400 kPa) and liquid side pressure of 150 psig (1034 kPa). 2. Exterior surfaces shall be covered with 19mm, flexible, closed cell insulation. 3. Water nozzles shall be welded connections. 4. Water side heat exchanger shall include vent and drain fittings and thermostatically controlled heaters to protect in off-cycle. 5. A 30-mesh, serviceable wye-strainer and mechanical couplings shall be provided for field installation 6. Paddle type flow switch shall be factory installed in water side heat exchanger outlet pipe. B. Air side heat exchnager: 1. Four-side air inlet, structured with “U” shaped heat exchanger, exclusively designed for minimum footprint per area 2. Coils shall be internally enhanced 7mm tube and hydrophilic pre-coated aluminum fins type condenser coils. Coils shall be designed for 650 psig (44.8 bar) or higher working pressure 2.10 PIPING PACKAGE A. Base design includes manufactuer provided piping headers including the flowing: 1. Weld piping connections. 2. CHW/HW Supply & Return Headers – Schedule 40 – 6”; Uppermost Header with Manual Air Vent 3. CHW/HW Single Entering and Leaving Fluid Connections 4. Reverse Return Piping Configuration 5. ANSI/AWWA C-606 Piping 6. Lead Unit Modulating Control Valve (Control by Others) 7. Piping package piping insulation to be field provided and installed. 8. Individual Module Return Piping – 2 .” a. Isolation Valve b. P/T Port c. .” Threadolet for Field Provided and Installed Pressure Gauge d. Wye Strainer (Provided with Chiller, Installed by Fisen on 4-Pipe Units) 9. Individual Module Supply Piping – 2 .” a. Isolation Valve b. P/T Port c. .” Threadolet for Field Provided and Installed Pressure Gauge d. Thermal Dispersion Flow Switch (Fisen Provided) e. Modulating (On/Off) Control Valve (Installed on each Follower Module) f. Drain with Plug (CHW Only) 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  236213 -5  Packaged Air-Cooled Refrigerant Compressor and Condenser Units  2.11 INSULATION A. Material: Closed-cell, flexible, UV protected, thermal insulation for preformed flexible elastomeric cellular thermal insulation in sheet and tubular form. B. Thickness: Standard 13 mm. C. Factory-applied insulation over cold surfaces of liquid chiller components including brazed plat heat exchanger, water pipe on chiller, and suction line. D. Adhesive: As recommended by insulation manufacturer and applied to 100 percent of insulation contact surface including all seams and joints. 2.12 ACOUSTICAL DATA A. Provide acoustical sound power or sound pressure level data in decibels (dB) at the scheduled eight (8) octave band center frequencies. B. Supplied equipment shall not exceed scheduled sound power or sound pressure level data at any load point. The mechanical Contractor shall be responsible for any additional costs associated with equipment deviation. C. Supplied equipment shall not exceed scheduled sound power or sound pressure level data at any load point. The mechanical Contractor shall be responsible for any additional costs associated with equipment deviation. D. Sound power levels in accordance with AHRI 370 1. 63:77 2. 125:78 3. 250:75 4. 500:74 5. 1000:68 6. 2000:66 7. 4000:66 8. 8000:63 9. LWA 76 2.13 POWER AND ELETRICAL REQUIREMENTS A. Power / Control Panel 1. Factory installed and wired NEMA 3R rain/dust tight, powder painted steel cabinets with tool lockable, hinged, latched, and gasket sealed outer doors. Provide main power connection(s), compressor starters and fan motor contactors, current overloads, and factory wiring. 2. Single Point Power Panel for multiple module array (460/3/60 – 65kA) 3. Communication Wiring Between Chiller Modules 4. Flow Switches & Control Valves Wired to Respective Chiller Control Panels4 B. Single Point Circuit Breaker: A unit mounted circuit breaker with external, lockable handle (in compliance with NEC Article 440-14), can be supplied to isolate the power voltage for servicing. SCCR Short citcuit current rating can reach 65kA. C. Power Factor: 1. The aggregate power factor of the new equipment when connected to the building electrical distribution shall be 0.9 or better 2. The installing contractor is responsible for additional cost to furnish and install power factor correction. Refer to narrative for additional information 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  236213 -6  Packaged Air-Cooled Refrigerant Compressor and Condenser Units  D. All exposed power wiring shall be routed through liquid-tight, UV-stabilized, non-metallic conduit. E. Supplied equipment shall not exceed scheduled Minimum Circuit Ampacity (MCA.) The mechanical Contractor shall be responsible for any additional costs associated with equipment deviation. 2.14 CONTROLS A. On unit, mount weatherproof steel control panel, NEMA 250, containing power and control wiring, molded case disconnect switch, factory wired with single point power connection. B. For each compressor, provide across-the-line starter, non-recycling compressor overload, starter relay, and control power transformer or terminal for controls power. Provide manual reset current overload protection. For each condenser fan, provide across-the-line starter with starter relay. C. Provide safety controls arranged so any one will shut down machine: 1. High discharge pressure switch (manual reset) for each compressor. 2. Low suction pressure switch (automatic reset) for each compressor. 3. Oil Pressure switch (manual reset). D. Provide the following operating controls: 1. Refer to Section 230993. E. Provide controls to permit operation down to 0 degrees F ambient temperature. F. Gauges: Prepiped for suction and discharge refrigerant pressures and oil pressure for each compressor. G. Chiller shall automatically reset to normal chiller operation after power failure. H. Unit operating software shall be stored in non-volatile memory. Field programmed set points shall be retained in memory for minimum 5 years. I. Alarm contacts shall be provided to remote alert for any unit or system safety fault. J. Display: 1. Provide full touch screen HMI display that is both viewable in direct sunlight and nighttime viewing. 2. Provide full touch screen HMI display that is both viewable in direct sunlight and has LED backlighting for nighttime viewing. Provide one keypad and display panel per chiller. 3. HMI display shall be accessible through hinged enclosure door. Display shall provide a minimum of unit setpoints, status, electrical data, temperature data, pressures, safety lockouts and diagnostics. K. Programmable Setpoints (within Manufacturer limits): Display language, chilled liquid cooling mode, local/remote control mode, display units mode, system lead/lag control mode, remote temperature reset, remote current limit, remote sound limit, low ambient temperature cutout enable/disable, leaving chilled liquid setpoint and range, maximum remote temperature reset. L. Display Data: Return and leaving water temperatures, outdoor air temperature, status of each unit, percent of compressors running, low leaving water temperature cutout setting, water temperature reset via Modbus interface, compressor run status, daily start/stop times, holiday status, modules operating hours (each), water heater and fan operation, water pump status, high and low pressure switch status, water switch status, discharge temperature, air-sources hx inlet temperature, shell-tube hx inlet temperature, accumulator inlet temperature, EXV steps. M. Single system Safeties: 1. Automatic reset required, includes: a. Fins temperature b. Low unit leaving water temperature in cooling mode c. High unit leaving water temperature in heating mode 2. Manual reset required, includes: 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  236213 -7  Packaged Air-Cooled Refrigerant Compressor and Condenser Units  a. Accumulator inlet temperature b. Discharge temperature c. Low pressure switch d. High pressure switch e. Fan motor protector f. Power fault g. Braze Plate Heat Exchanger freeze fault h. Low leaving water temp in heating mode 3. After the twice trips by automatically reset and third trip by manual reset within 60 minutes: a. High pressure at high pressure side b. Low pressure at low pressure side c. Water flow d. High discharge temperature e. Communication fault with fan f. Communication fault with unit g. DC driver fault h. Reverse valve shifting fault 4. Module Safeties: a. Automatic reset 1) Ambient temperature 2) Low system leaving water temperature in cooling mode 3) High system leaving water temperature in heating mode 4) Low air inlet temperature in cooling mode 5) High air inlet temperature in heating mode 6) Communication fault with HMI controller b. Manual reset 1) System return water temperature 2) System leaving water temperature 3) Water flow fault c. External linkage fault 1) Over limit operation time 5. BAS Communications: BACnet MS/TP, Modbus and N2 communication capabilities are standard 6. Advanced defrost logic to reduce defrost cycle time: a. Defrost shall be based on refrigerant pressure. Thermocouple-based control is not acceptable. b. Subcooling circuits shall be designed to prevent ice build-up on bottom of coil c. Maximum of one circuit may enter defrost cycle at any given time, to reduce heating capacity loss 2.15 ACCESSORIES AND OPTIONS A. Low sound kits:The option includes compressor acoustic blankets for VSD compressors and lower panels. Provide as required to meet previously listed acoutical data. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 INSTALLATION A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's installation instructions. B. Complete structural, mechanical, and electrical connections in accordance with manufacturer's installation instructions. C. Location: Locate unit as indicated on drawings, including cleaning and service maintenance clearance per Manufacturer instructions. Adjust and level unit on support structure. If equipment provided exceeds height of scheduled chiller or requres addtional space for air flow clearances, installing contractor is responsible for additional costs associated with extending the height of parapet or screening walls/enclosures. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  236213 -8  Packaged Air-Cooled Refrigerant Compressor and Condenser Units  D. Components: Installing Contractor shall provide and install all auxiliary devices and accessories for fully operational chiller. E. Electrical: Coordinate electrical requirements and connections for all power feeds. F. Controls: Coordinate all control requirements and connections with Controls Contractor. G. Provide for connection to electrical service. Refer to Section 260583. H. Install units on concrete base as indicated. Refer to Section 033000. I. Provide connection to refrigeration piping system and evaporators. Refer to Section 232300. Comply with ASHRAE Std 15. J. Provide manual shutoff valves at each refrigeration system component ( condenser, condensing unit, evaporator, branch controller, etc..) for service 3.02 SPARE PARTS A. Manufacturer to submit add alternate pricing for recommended spare parts list and shelf service life. 3.03 SYSTEM STARTUP A. Supply initial charge of refrigerant and oil for each refrigeration system. Replace losses of oil or refrigerant prior to end of correction period. B. Base bid to include manufacturer provided refrigerant charge prior to shipping. Provide add alternate price to ship with nitrogen or other manufacturer approved gas and field charged with refrigerant. C. Charge system with refrigerant and test entire system for leaks after completion of installation. Repair leaks, put system into operation, and test equipment performance. D. Shut-down system if initial start-up and testing takes place in winter and machines are to remain inoperative. Repeat start-up and testing operation at beginning of first cooling season. E. Provide cooling season start-up, and winter season shut-down for first year of operation. F. Inspect and test for refrigerant leaks every _________ during first year of operation. G. Manufacturer to provide service tec to be on site to witness rigging and ensure rigging is per manufactuers instructions. H. Manufacturer to provide phased commissioning support for both cooling and heating start up approximately 6 months apart. END OF SECTION 236213 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  236213 -9  Packaged Air-Cooled Refrigerant Compressor and Condenser Units  SECTION 238216 AIR COILS J. VEREECKE NOTE: THIS SECTION DOES NOT BELONG IN 23 82 00. IT SHOULD STAY AS A STAND ALONE SECTION. PART 1 GENERAL 2.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Water heating coils. B. Water cooling coils. 2.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Section 232300 -Refrigerant Piping. B. Section 233100 -HVAC Ducts and Casings: Installation of duct coils. 2.03 REFERENCE STANDARDS A. AHRI 410 -Forced-Circulation Air-Cooling and Air-Heating Coils; 2001 (R2011). B. ASTM A666 -Standard Specification for Annealed or Cold-Worked Austenitic Stainless Steel Sheet, Strip, Plate, and Flat Bar; 2015. C. ASTM B88 -Standard Specification for Seamless Copper Water Tube; 2016. D. ASTM B88M -Standard Specification for Seamless Copper Water Tube (Metric); 2016. E. SMACNA (DCS) -HVAC Duct Construction Standards Metal and Flexible; 2005 (Rev. 2009). 2.04 SUBMITTALS A. See Section 013000 -Administrative Requirements, for submittal procedures. B. Product Data: Provide coil and frame configurations, dimensions, materials, rows, connections, and rough-in dimensions. Include rated capacity and pressure drop for each air coil. C. Shop Drawings: Indicate coil and frame configurations, dimensions, materials, rows, connections, and rough-in dimensions. Diagram power, signal, and control wiring. D. Certificates: Certify that coils are tested and rated in accordance with ARI 410. E. Operation and Maintenance Data: For air coils to include in operation and maintenance manuals. F. Warranty: Submit manufacturer's warranty and ensure forms have been completed in Owner's name and registered with manufacturer. 2.05 QUALITY ASSURANCE 2.06 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Protect coil fins from crushing and bending by leaving in shipping cases until installation, and by storing indoors. B. Protect coils from entry of dirt and debris with pipe caps or plugs. 2.07 WARRANTY A. See Section 017800 -Closeout Submittals, for additional warranty requirements. B. Provide five year manufacturer warranty for ______________________. PART 2 PRODUCTS 3.01 WATER HEATING COILS A. Manufacturers: 1. Aerofin Corporation: www.aerofin.com. 2. Carrier Corporation 3. Trane, a brand of Ingersoll Rand: www.trane.com. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  238216 -1  Air Coils  B. Performance Ratings: Tested and rated according to AHRI 410. C. Tubes: 5/8 inch OD ASTM B 743 seamless copper arranged in parallel or staggered pattern, expanded into fins, silver brazed joints. D. Fins: Aluminum continuous plate type with full fin collars minimum 0.006 inch (0.152 mm) thick. E. Casing: Die formed channel frame of 16 gauge, 0.0598 inch galvanized steel with mounting holes on 3 inch centers. Provide tube supports for coils longer than 36 inches. F. Face-and-Bypass Dampers: Alternating arrangement of coil segments and dampers. 1. Dampers: Extruded-aluminumblades with edge and end seals; full-length drive rod and mount for actuator. G. Headers: Seamless copper tube with silver brazed joints. H. Testing: Air test under water to 350 psi for working pressure of 200 psi and 220 degrees F. I. Configuration: Drainable, with threaded plugs for drain and vent. 3.02 WATER COOLING COILS A. Manufacturers: 1. Aerofin Corporation: www.aerofin.com. 2. Trane, a brand of Ingersoll Rand: www.trane.com. B. Performance Ratings: Tested and rated according to AHRI 410. C. Tubes: 5/8 inch OD ASTM B 743 seamless copper arranged in parallel or staggered pattern, expanded into fins, silver brazed joints. D. Fins: Aluminum or copper continuous plate type with full fin collars minimum 0.10 inch thick. Solder coat copper fin coils. E. Casing: Die formed channel frame of 16 gauge, 0.0598 inch galvanized steel with 3/8 inch mounting holes on 3 inch centers. Provide tube supports for coils longer than 36 inches. F. Casing: ASTM A666, Type 316 stainless steel, minimum 0.0625 inch thick for flanged mounting. G. Headers: Seamless copper tube with silver brazed joints. H. Testing: Air test under water to 350 psi for working pressure of 200 psi and 220 degrees F. I. Configuration: Drainable, with threaded plugs in headers for drain and vent; threaded plugs in return bends and in headers opposite each tube. 3.03 REFRIGERANT COILS A. Manufacturers: 1. Aerofin Corporation: www.aerofin.com. 2. Trane, a brand of Ingersoll Rand: www.trane.com. B. Performance Ratings: Tested and rated according to AHRI 410. C. Tubes: 5/8 inch OD ASTM B 743 seamless copper arranged in parallel or staggered pattern, expanded into fins, silver brazed joints. D. Fins: Aluminum continuous plate type with full fin collars. E. Casing: Die formed channel frame of 16 gauge, 0.0598 inch galvanized steel with 3/8 inch mounting holes on 3 inch centers. Provide tube supports for coils longer than 36 inches. F. Headers: Seamless copper or brass tubes with silver brazed joints. G. Liquid Distributors: Copper venturi type distributor with ASTM B88, Type L (ASTM B88M, Type B) seamless copper distributor tubes, 5/16 inch outside diameter, brazed joints; maximum 12 circuits per distributor. H. Testing: Air test under water at 450 psi for working pressure of 250 psi; clean, dehydrate, and seal with dry nitrogen charge. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  238216 -2  Air Coils  PART 3 EXECUTION 4.01 EXAMINATION A. Examine ducts, plenums, and casings to receive air coils for compliance with requirements for installation tolerances and other conditions affecting coil performance. B. Examine roughing-in for piping systems to verify actual locations of piping connections before coil installation. C. Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected. 4.02 INSTALLATION A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's written instructions. B. Install in ducts and casings in accordance with SMACNA (DCS). 1. Support coil sections independent of piping on steel channel or double angle frames and secure to casings. 2. Provide frames for maximum three coil sections. 3. Arrange supports to avoid piercing drain pans. 4. Provide airtight seal between coil and duct or casing. 5. Refer to Section 233100. C. Protect coils to prevent damage to fins and flanges. Comb out bent fins. D. Install coils level. Install cleanable tube coils with 1:50 pitch. E. Make connections to coils with unions and flanges. F. Install piping adjacent to coils to allow service and maintenance. G. Provide manual shutoff valves at each refrigeration system component ( condenser, condensing unit, evaporator, branch controller unit, etc )for service. H. Hydronic Coils: 1. Hydronic Coils: Connect water supply to leaving air side of coil (counterflow arrangement). 2. Provide shut-off valve on supply line and lockshield balancing valve with memory stop on return line. 3. Provide manual air vents at high points complete with stop valve. 4. Ensure water coils are drainable and provide drain connection at low points. I. Cooling Coils: 1. Provide three break moisture eliminators of 24 gauge, 0.0239 inch galvanized steel, where air velocity exceeds 500 ft/min. 2. Provide drain pan and drain connection; fabricate from 20 gauge, 0.0359 inch galvanized steel, extend 3 inches from face of entering air side, 6 inches from face of leaving air side, and 4 inches from face of eliminators. Pipe drain pans individually to floor drain with water seal trap. J. Refrigerant Coils: Provide sight glass in liquid line within 12 inches of coil. Refer to Section 232300. K. Insulate headers located outside air flow as specified for piping. Refer to Section 230719. END OF SECTION 238216 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  238216 -3  Air Coils  SECTION 238241 WATER-TO-WATER HEAT PUMPS PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Semi-hermetic, direct drive, water-cooled reciprocating compressor heat pumps with single or multiple compressors. 1.02 RELATED REQUIREMENTS A. Section 230529 -Hangers and Supports for HVAC Piping and Equipment. B. Section 230548 -Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC. C. Section 230593 -Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing for HVAC. D. Section 260583 -Wiring Connections. 1.03 REFERENCE STANDARDS A. Conform to UL 60335-2-40 -Standard for Heating and Cooling Equipment, Safety Standard.  In the event the unit is not UL approved, the manufacturer shall, at manufacturer expense, provide for a field inspection by an UL representative to verify conformance to UL standards. If necessary, contractor shall perform modifications to the unit to comply with UL, as directed by the UL representative. B. Conform to ASME SECTION VIII Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code for construction and testing of unfired pressure vessels. C. Conform to ANSI/ASHRAE STANDARD 15 safety code for mechanical refrigeration. D. Unit shall bear the AHRI Certification Label for the specific type of water heat pumps applicable. E. Heat pump manufacturer shall provide LEED-NC EA Credit Calculation for each heat pump utilizing the factors specified by the U.S. Green Building Council based upon equipment life of 23 years F. ASHRAE Std 90.1 I-P -Energy Standard for Buildings Except Low-Rise Residential Buildings; Most Recent Edition Adopted by Authority Having Jurisdiction, Including All Applicable Amendments and Supplements. G. ASTM E84 -Standard Test Method for Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials; 2016. H. NFPA 70 -National Electrical Code; Most Recent Edition Adopted by Authority Having Jurisdiction, Including All Applicable Amendments and Supplements. I. UL 723 -Standard for Test for Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials; Current Edition, Including All Revisions. 1.04 SUBMITTALS A. See Section 013000 -Administrative Requirements for submittal procedures. B. Product Data: Manufacturer's data sheets for each product furnished, including: 1. Submit drawings indicating components, assembly, dimensions, weights and loadings, required clearances, and location and size of field connections.  Indicate equipment, piping and connections, valves, strainers, and thermostatic valves required for complete system. 2. Submit product data indicating rated capacities, weights, specialties and accessories, electrical requirements and wiring diagrams. 3. Submit manufacturer's installation instructions. 4. Submit performance data indicating energy input versus cooling load output from 100 to 25 percent of full load with constant entering condenser water temperature. 5. Electrical and performance data showing compliance with specifications. 6. Required water flow rates and temperatures for inflow and outflow. 7. Detailed electrical wiring diagrams. 8. Storage and handling requirements and recommendations. 9. Installation instructions. 10. Start-up, troubleshooting, and TAB instructions. 11. Specimen warranty. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  238241 -1  Water-to-Water Heat Pumps  C. Shop Drawings: Show piping connections and interface to source-side and load-side piping, circulator pumps, hot water piping, and drains. Include control wiring diagrams prepared specifically for this project, including unit controls interface. D. Manufacturer's qualification statement. E. Installer's qualification statement. F. Field test reports. G. Sustainable Design Documentation: Submit manufacturer's product data on refrigerant used, showing compliance with specified requirements. H. Operation and Maintenance Data: Include replaceable parts lists, parts sources, and troubleshooting guide. I. Warranty: Submit manufacturer warranty and ensure that forms have been completed in Owner's name and registered with manufacturer. J. Include start-up instructions, operation data, maintenance data, controls, and accessories. Include trouble-shooting guide. 1.05 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Each unit shall be factory run and tested in the manufacture’s facility under customer specific design conditions.  Each unit shall be provided with documentation verifying this testing. Customer shall have access to this documentation at any time and shall be available via manufacturer’s website. Equipment shall be manufactured in a facility dedicated to the manufacturing of refrigeration based equipment.  Facility shall maintain a clean, controlled environment to ensure highest quality control standards. B. All proposals for heat pump performance must include an AHRI or EN 12900 approved selection method. 1.06 SHORT CIRCUIT CURRENT RATING: A. All electrical equipment, starters and controller assemblies shall be provided with short circuit rating as follows: 1. Provide controllers with listed short circuit current rating not less than.65kAIC unless approved by the engineer based on submitted short circuit study. 2. Listed series ratings are acceptable, except where not permitted by motor contribution according to NFPA 70. 3. Label equipment utilizing series ratings as required by NFPA 70. 1.07 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Verify upon delivery that equipment nameplate data, including electrical data, matches specified and ordered equipment. Verify that refrigerant charge has been retained during shipping. B. Store products in manufacturer's unopened packaging until ready for installation. C. Store products under cover and elevated above grade. D. Heat pumps shall be shipped in a wooden box covering the entire unit. E. Heat pumps shall be rigged and transported as specified by the following includiing but not limited to the Department Of Transportation and all AHJ's. 1.08 MAINTENANCE SERVICE 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  238241 -2  Water-to-Water Heat Pumps  A. All inspections and service of units shall be accomplished by factory trained and authorized servicing technicians. B. All labor for leak checking the heat pump according to the manufacturer's IOM and documentation must be included. C. All work shall be done by manufacturer's commercial warranty agent. D. Include maintenance items as recommended in manufacturer's operating and maintenance data. 1.09 VIRTUAL FACTORY WITNESS TESTING A. Water source heat pumps shall be factory tested at peak project design conditions at the following conditions. 1. 180 degree hot water, 170 hot water return. Source temperatures 100/85 2. 130 degree hot water supply, 120 hot water return.Source temperatures 100/85 B. Units shall be tested at 5 operating points: Min flow, 25%,50%75% and 100%. 1.10 WARRANTY A. See Section 017800 -Closeout Submittals for additional warranty requirements. B. Comply with manufacturer's installation instructions for rigging, unloading, and transporting units. C. Provide a full parts warranty for one year from start-up or 18 months from shipment, whichever occurs first. D. 5 year Manufacturer’s Parts only warranty on compressors PART 2 PRODUCTS 3.01 HEAT PUMP PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. Manfacturers 1. Oilon ChillHeat (MPN) Local Vendor 2. York B. The contractor shall furnish and install reciprocating compressor type water source heat pump as shown and scheduled in the plans. The units shall be installed in accordance with this specification and produce the specified tonnage per the scheduled data. C. Approved equals must use reciprocating compressors and meet the specifications including all scheduled performance. 3.02 GENERAL WATER-TO-WATER HEAT PUMP FABRICATION REQUIREMENTS A. Water Source Heat Pump (WSHP) shall be capable of providing heating and / or cooling functions. Water (or Glycol mixture) shall be used for the heat source and water shall be used for the heat supply B. The WSHP shall be capable of providing a heating supply temperature (condenser outlet) up to 200 degrees F. C. Heat pump shall be completely packaged with connections for evaporator supply and return, condenser supply and return, subcooler supply and return. D. Each heat pump shall be provided with a single refrigeration relief valve. E. Packaged WSHP shall be completely factory constructed and tested.  All compressors shall be accessible from side of unit for service and replacement. F. Heat pump shall be configured to allow for continuous operation with one or more compressors out of service. G. Heat pump enclosure shall be NEMA 1 with removable panels.  All compressors shall be mounted on factory installed springs. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  238241 -3  Water-to-Water Heat Pumps  H. Heat pumps shall clearly display packaged UL Label and shall be nameplated for design load conditions. I. REFRIGERANT 1. Heat pumps shall be capable of using multiple types of refrigerant based on system temperature and load requirements. 2. All refrigerant shall be contained to the unit.  External refrigerant piping shall not be required. 3. All refrigerants shall have an A1 Safety Compliance, and ODP value of 0, and a GWP value lower than 600. 4. Refrigerants shall not be flammable. 5. Selection of refrigerant shall not affect the packaged UL Label. 6. Avalable refrigerants shall be a minimum of the following: a. R450A b. R513B c. R515B d. R1233ZD/E J. Compressor and Motor 1. Construct heat pump using semi-hermetic reciprocating compressors with independent circuits. a. Statically and dynamically balance rotating parts. b. Provide oil lubrication system with oil charging valve and oil filter to ensure adequate lubrication during starting, stopping and normal operation. c. Provide compressor with automatic capacity reduction equipment consisting of capacity control.  Compressor must start unloaded for soft start on motors. d. Provide compressor heater to evaporate refrigerant returning to compressor during shut down.  Energize heater when compressor is not operating. 2. Heat pump should be able to unload to 25 percent of full load tonnage with constant entering condenser water temperature. 3. Provide constant speed 1750 rpm for 60Hz (or 1450 rpm for 50Hz) compressor motor, suction gas cooled with robust construction and system design protection, designed for across-the-line or wye-delta starting. Furnish with starter. K. Energy Efficiency: ASHRAE Std 90.1 I-P EER and COP ratings, minimum. L. Cabinet Assembly: 1. Construct of zinc-coated, heavy-gauge, galvanized steel with exposed edges rounded. 2. Finish: Factory apply electrostatic powder paint or baked enamel finish. Coordinate with Architect for specific color finish requirements of console units or other units installed within occupied spaces. 3. Provide access panels for inspection, cleaning, and servicing of refrigerant, controls, and heat exchangers. 4. Interior Insulation: Minimum 1/2 inch thick, dual density, bonded glass fiber. 5. Provide flame spread of less than 25, and smoke developed classification of less than 50 when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 and UL 723. 6. Sound and Noise Suppression: a. Mechanical Rooms: 18 gauge, 0.05 inch, minimum. b. Occupied Spaces: 16 gauge, 0.06 inch, minimum. c. Compressor enclosure lined with 1/2 inch thick insulation. d. Include vibration isolation between compressor and heat exchanger. e. Include length-wise unit base stiffeners. f. Foam gasket sealant around compressor and end panel perimeter. M. EVAPORATOR 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  238241 -4  Water-to-Water Heat Pumps  1. The evaporator shall be built in accordance with ANSI/ASHRAE 15-Safety Code for Mechanical Refrigeration.  Design, test, and stamp evaporator refrigerant side for 275 psig working pressure in accordance with ANSI/ASME SEC VIII. 2. Evaporator shall be internally and externally enhanced. The heat exchanger shall be securely supported at intermediate supports and physically expanded into both ends of the tube sheets. Evaporator shall be capable of cleaning without removing. 3. Factory insulation will be 3/4" insulation Armaflex II or equal (k=0.28) and cover the evaporator. N. WATER COOLED CONDENSER 1. The water-cooled condenser shall be built in accordance with ANSI/ASHRAE 15 Safety Code for Mechanical Refrigeration.  Design, test, and stamp condenser refrigerant side for 464 psig working pressure in accordance with ANSI/ASME SEC VIII. 2. Condenser shall be internally and externally enhanced. Condenser shall be capable of cleaning without removing. 3. Optimized compressors and high condenser temperature control panel allows for leaving condenser water temperatures up to 248.F (60.C). This option allows for entering condenser water temperatures above 95.F (35.C). Condenser leaving water temperature control option is required; the setpoint range is 80.F (26.7.C) to 248.F (60.C). O. REFRIGERANT CIRCUIT 1. All units shall have 2 independent refrigerant circuits, each depending on size up to 3 compressors. If manifolded compressors are provided on a circuit, then individual compressor warranties must be provided for each compressor on the circuit. 2. Heatpump shall be able to unload to 25% of capacity with AHRI relief and constant entering condenser water temperature. 3. Provide for each refrigerant circuit: a. Suction service valve b. Discharge service valve c. Liquid line shutoff valve d. Refrigerant pressure relief valves for low side and high side e. Electronic expansion valve f. Electronic expansion valve g. Charging port h. Oil separator 4. The Heat pump shall be configured with single relief valve on both the high pressure side and low pressure side of each refrigerant circuit. P. Electrical: 1. Provide factory-installed phase loss safety device for 3-phase units. 2. Configure unit for single point connection, include terminal for field-installed components. Q. Unit Controls 1. The heat pump(s) shall be controlled by a microprocessor-based, proportional and integral controller to show water and refrigerant temperatures, refrigerant pressures and diagnostics. A dedicated heat pump control panel with a non-coded display is to be supplied with each heat pump by the heat pump manufacturer. The controller shall provide heat pump capacity control in response to the leaving chilled water temperature. 2. The heat pump control panel shall utilize an Adaptive Control Microprocessor which will automatically take action to prevent unit shutdown due to abnormal operating conditions associated with: evaporator refrigerant temperature, high condensing pressure and motor current overload. 3. If the heat pump runs in any of the abnormal operating conditions, the heat pump will continue to run, in an unloaded state, and will continue to produce chilled/ hot water in an attempt to meet the load.  However, if the heat pump reaches the trip-out limits, the heat pump controls will take the heat pump off line for protection, and a manual reset is required. Once the "near trip" condition is corrected, the heat pump will return to normal operation and can then produce full load cooling. 4. The heat pump control panel shall provide control of heat pump operation and monitoring of heat pump sensors, actuators, relays, and switches.  The panel shall be a complete system for stand-alone heat pump control and include controls to safely and efficiently operate the heat pump. 5. Manufacturer shall provide a compressor that is capable of unloading to an infinite amount of positions in order to provide water temperature accuracy of +/-0.5.F. In the event that the compressor unloads to finite steps, the manufacturer shall provide eight (8) or more steps of unloading on each compressor or provide hot gas bypass (HGBP). 6. The heat pump control panel is to be provided with the following digital type pressure readouts: a. Evaporator refrigerant pressure b. Evaporator refrigerant pressure 7. The front of the heat pump control panel shall be capable of displaying the following clear language as standard: a. Entering and leaving evaporator water temperature b. Entering and leaving condenser water temperature c. Chilled/ hot water setpoint d. Electrical 3 phase current limit and percent RLA setpoint e. Electrical 3 phase amp draw f. Heat pump operating mode g. Condenser refrigerant temperature h. Elapsed time and number-of-starts counter i. Heat pump compressor run status relay j. Diagnostics with time and date stamp k. A relay output to start the condenser water pump and/or enable the cooling tower temperature controls. l. The control panel display shall identify the fault, indicate date, time, and operating mode at time of occurrence, and provide type of reset required and a help message. The historic diagnostic report shall display the last 20 diagnostics with their times and dates of occurrence m. A relay output that shall energize whenever an alarm is active. n. A relay output that shall energize whenever the unit is operating in a limit mode for an extended time period. o. A relay output that shall energize whenever a compressor is running. p. A relay output that shall energize whenever the heat pump is operating in Adaptive Controls due to high head pressure. 8. The heat pump control panel shall provide a programmable soft load to prevent the heat pump from achieving full capacity during the pulldown period by imposing a ramped current limit, or a temperature pulldown rate.  Either can be adjusted to limit how fast the heat pump can load after an initial startup. 9. The heat pump control panel shall provide leaving chilled/ hot water temperature reset based upon return water temperature. 10. The heat pump control panel shall have the ability to operate in variable evaporator flow applications. The heat pump control must be able to operate with evaporator flow rate changes up to 10% during a 1 minute time period while maintaining 0.5.F water temperature accuracy.  The heat pump control must also be able to operate with evaporator flow rate changes up to 30% during a 1 minute time period while maintaining 2.F water temperature accuracy. 11. The Heat pump control panel shall be capable of communicating to a balance of plant control panel (furnished under separate specification).  Balance of plant control panel shall provide each heat pump with heating and cooling setpoints, enable / disable contacts and mode selection.  Balance of plant control panel shall control the associated evaporator and condenser water circulating pumps along with associated heat exchangers and tanks. 12. The heat pump control panel shall have the ability to control the leaving condenser fluid temperature setpoint through the user interface or via a 0-10 Vdc signal from a building automation system. 13. The Heat pump control panel shall be capable of communicating to a balance of plant control panel (furnished under separate specification).  Balance of plant control panel shall provide each heat pump with heating and cooling setpoints, enable / disable contacts and mode selection.  Balance of plant control panel shall control the associated evaporator and condenser water circulating pumps along with associated heat exchangers and tanks 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  238241 -5  Water-to-Water Heat Pumps  58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  238241 -6  Water-to-Water Heat Pumps  R. VARIABLE SPEED DRIVES 1. Heat pumps shall be provided with the maximum allowable quantity of variable speed drives to allow for modulation of the associated compressors.  Variable speed drives shall allow for a 4:1 compressor turndown 2. VFD shall be air cooled, microprocessor based, pulse width modulated design. Converter section with full-wave fixed diode bridge rectifier shall convert incoming fixed voltage/frequency to fixed DC voltage. Transistorized inverter and control regulator shall convert fixed DC voltage to a sinusoidal PWM waveform. Integrated controls shall coordinate the motor speed to optimize chiller performance over a wide variety of operating conditions. 3. Drive shall be suitable for nameplate voltage ±10%. Drive shall be suitable for continuous operation at 100% of nameplate amps and 150% of nameplate amps for 3 seconds. Drive shall comply with applicable UL, CE, and NEMA standards. Drive shall be suitable for operation in altitudes up to 6560 feet (2000 m) above sea level. 4. Drives shall be provided mounted to the Heat pump or as an option, shipped loose for installation withing close proximity of the heat pump. 5. Protection a. Under-voltage b. Over voltage c. Phase loss d. Phase unbalance protection e. Motor overload protection f. Motor over temperature protection 6. Drives shall be as manufactured by ABB and be NEMA 1 Construction. S. STARTERS 1. Motor starters shall include incoming line provisions for the number and size cables shown on the drawings. Incoming line lugs shall be copper mechanical type. Connection directly to the contactors is not permissible. 2. Contactors shall be sized properly to the heat pump full load and locked rotor currents. Contactors shall have double break main contacts with weld resistant silver cadmium faces.  Auxiliary interlocks that interface with the control panel shall be low resistance having palladium silver contacts. 3. Each motor starter shall include a control power transformer with fused primary and secondary. Current transformers of the proper size, ratio and burden capacity shall be provided to provide a signal to the control panel and optional devices.  Control relays shall be provided within the motor starter to interface with the control panel. 4. Each starter shall include an advanced motor protection system incorporating electronic three phase overloads and current transformers.  This electronic motor protection system shall monitor and protect against the following conditions: a. Three phase overload protection b. Overload protection during start-up c. Phase imbalance d. Phase loss e. Phase reversal f. Low voltage 5. Alternately the advanced motor protection system can be furnished in the heat pump control panel. 6. Each starter/control shall be designed and able to operate in temperatures up to 104.F. 7. All field supplied wires, bus bars, and fittings shall be copper only. 8. Provide in the starter panel: a. The motor starters shall be Wye-Delta. Motor starters shall have a UL 60335-2-40 enclosure. Enclosure shall be constructed of 14-gauge steel minimum. b. Terminal Blocks. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  238241 -7  Water-to-Water Heat Pumps  T. SOUND 1. Acoustics: Manufacturer must provide sound pressure data in decibels. 2. If manufacturer cannot meet the noise levels, sound attenuation devices must be installed to meet this performance level. PART 3 EXECUTION 4.01 EXAMINATION A. Verify that available power supply complies with equipment specifications. B. Do not begin installation until buried ground loop has been properly prepared and is ready for connection. Notify Architect of unsatisfactory preparation before proceeding. 4.02 PREPARATION A. Clean surfaces thoroughly prior to installation. B. Ensure electric utility connections are achieved in an orderly and expeditious manner. C. Verify that equipment is undamaged, including refrigerant components and shipped loose items. 4.03 DELIVERY, HANDLING AND STORAGE A. Comply with manufacturer's installation instructions for rigging, unloading, and transporting units. 4.04 INSTALLATION A. Install equipment in accordance with manufacturer's written installation instructions. B. Unit Mounting: 1. Ground or Surface-Mount: Include vibration-isolated support base; see Section 230548. 2. Above Finished Floor: Include hangers and supports; see Section 230529. 3. Do not obstruct maintenance access to equipment by any type of piping, electrical conduit, or any other utility. C. Electrical: Provide equipment raceway, wiring, and cables; see Section 260583. D. Provide for connection to electrical service. If oil pump is electric include the connection of the electrical to the oil pump. E. Provide elastomeric isolator to reduce vibration transmission. F. On units without unit mounted starters provide for connection of electrical wiring between starter and heat pump control panel, oil pump, and purge unit. G. Arrange piping for easy dismantling to permit tube cleaning. H. Provide piping from heat pump relief valve to outdoors.  Size as recommended by manufacturer. I. Proof of flow shall be provided by the equipment manufacturer, mechanically installed and electrically wired, at the jobsite by the contractor. J. Start system and adjust controls and equipment for satisfactory operation. K. Adjust water temperature control system and place in operation so that water quantities circulated are as required. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  238241 -8  Water-to-Water Heat Pumps  4.05 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Upon completion and before final acceptance of work, test each system to demonstrate compliance with the contract requirements. 1. Adjust controls and balance systems prior to final acceptance of completed systems. 2. Test controls through every cycle of operation. 3. Test safety controls to demonstrate performance of required function. 4. Furnish water, electricity, instruments, connecting devices, and personnel for tests. 5. Clean equipment, piping, strainers, ducts, and filters. 6. Coordinate testing with testing of related piping, specified elsewhere. 7. Correct defects in work and repeat tests. B. Operational Testing: After demonstration of satisfactory operation perform operational testing: 1. Test each item of equipment in operation for continuous period of not less than 24 hours under every condition of operation in accordance with equipment manufacturer's recommendations. 2. Verify that each item of equipment operating parameters are within limits recommended by the manufacturer. 3. Manufacturer's Recommended Test: Conduct the manufacturer's recommended field testing; provide a factory trained field representative authorized by and to represent the equipment manufacturer during the complete execution of the field testing. C. See Section 230593 for additional testing, adjusting, and balancing (TAB) requirements of piping, equipment, and controls. D. Within 30 calendar days after acceptable completion of testing, submit each test report for review and approval; include: E. 1. Unit nameplate data and actual voltage and ampere consumption. 2. Load-side supply and return water flow and temperatures and measurement equipment. 3. Source-side supply and return water flow and temperatures and measurement equipment. 4. Ambient air temperature at heat pump unit. 5. Date, name, and signature of person testing and reporting. F. Startup -Provide all labor and materials to perform startup.  Startup shall be performed by a factory-trained technician from the original equipment manufacturer (OEM).  Technician shall confirm that equipment has been correctly installed and passes specification checklist prior to equipment becoming operational and covered under OEM warranty.  This shall be done in strict accordance with manufacturer's specifications and requirements.  Third-party service agencies are not permitted. G. A start-up log shall be furnished by the factory approved start-up technician to document the chiller's start-up date and shall be signed by the owner or his authorized representative prior to commissioning the chillers. H. Provide local service agent with direct access to factory support on equipment. Heat pump manufacturer shall maintain service capabilities no more than 50 miles from the jobsite. I. The service provider shall employ a minimum of 20 full time, competent HVAC and automation system servicepersons on staff, whose office in which they operate from is within 50 miles of the job site and who have been within their employment for a minimum of 5 years J. Service agreement. Provide a minimum of a 2 year service agreement to maintain equipment per manufacturer’s instructions. 2 year service agreement shall commence after system start.up is complete. K. During the first 12 months of operation, a factory-trained technician from the original equipment manufacturer (OEM) shall perform quarterly on-site operating inspections to confirm the chiller's operational performance. The manufacturer shall provide the owner with a report describing the condition of the equipment, current operating log, any issues found needing to be addressed, and recommended corrective actions. 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  238241 -9  Water-to-Water Heat Pumps  L. Factory service tech shall be available for commissioning during peak heating season and swing season operation, 4.06 SPARE PARTS A. Manufacturer to submit add alternate pricing for recommended spare parts list and self service life. 4.07 CLOSEOUT ACTIVITIES A. Training: Upon completion of work and at time designated by Architect, provide services of water source heat pump manufacturer's technical representative for period of not less than one 8-hour working day for instruction of Owner's operating personnel in proper operation and maintenance of equipment. 4.08 PROTECTION A. Protect installed products until completion of project. B. Touch-up, repair, or replace damaged products before Date of Substantial Completion. END OF SECTION 238241 58306 / 231756 -Prudential Decarb -Plaza -ASHP Design  238241 -10  Water-to-Water Heat Pumps  