






UTICA COMMUNITY SCHOOLS
STEVENSON HIGH SCHOOL CHILLER REPLACEMENT STERLING HEIGHTS, MICHIGAN



PROJECT MANUAL


IDS Project No. 23114-1032
February 28, 2025
Bids



Project Manual




Utica Community Schools Stevenson High School Chiller Replacement Sterling Heights, Michigan





INTEGRATED design SOLUTIONS
architecture engineering interiors & technology
1441 W Long Lake Road, Suite 200
Troy, Michigan 48098
5211 Cascade Road SE, Suite 300 Grand Rapids, Michigan 49546

248.823.2100, fax 248.823.2200
www.ids-michigan.com IDS Project No. 23114-1032


SECTION 00 0110 - TABLE OF CONTENTS

SECTION	TITLE	PAGES

PROCUREMENT AND CONTRACTING REQUIREMENTS GROUP DIVISION 00 – PROCUREMENT AND CONTRACTING REQUIREMENTS

INTRODUCTORY INFORMATION

00 0101
Project Title Page .......................................................................................................
1 only
00 0110
Table of Contents ........................................................................................................
1 thru 3

PROCUREMENT REQUIREMENTS

Refer to Procurement Requirements authored by the Construction Manager contained in a separate volume.

SPECIFICATIONS GROUP
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS SUBGROUP DIVISION 01 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

01 1000
Summary .....................................................................................................................
1 thru 4
01 2500
Substitution Procedures ..............................................................................................
1 thru 3
01 3300
Submittal Procedures ..................................................................................................
1 thru 9

Submittal Form ............................................................................................................
1 thru 2

Hold Harmless Form....................................................................................................
1 thru 4
01 4000
Quality Requirements ..................................................................................................
1 thru 8
01 4200
References ..................................................................................................................
1 thru 2
01 6000
Product Requirements .................................................................................................
1 thru 5
01 7300
Execution .....................................................................................................................
1 thru 10
01 7700
Closeout Procedures ...................................................................................................
1 thru 5
01 7823
Operation and Maintenance Data................................................................................
1 thru 7
01 7839
Project Record Documents..........................................................................................
1 thru 4
01 7900
Demonstration and Training ........................................................................................
1 thru 4
07 9200
Joint Sealants ..............................................................................................................
1 thru 6

Refer to Division 1 Sections authored by the Construction Manager contained in a separate volume.
FACILITY CONSTRUCTION SUBGROUP DIVISION 02 – EXISTING CONDITIONS
02 4119	Selective Demolition	1 thru 6

DIVISION 03 - CONCRETE

03 0130
Cast-in-Place Concrete Maintenance ..........................................................................
1 thru 7
03 3000
Cast-in-Place Concrete ...............................................................................................
1 thru 15

DIVISION 04 - MASONRY

04 2000	Unit Masonry	1 thru 15

DIVISION 05 - METALS

Not Applicable

DIVISION 06 – WOOD, PLASTICS AND COMPOSITES

Not Applicable

DIVISION 07 - THERMAL AND MOISTURE PROTECTION



07 9200	Joint Sealants	1 thru 6

DIVISION 08 - OPENINGS

Not Applicable

DIVISION 09 - FINISHES

09 9600	High-Performance Coatings	1 thru 13

DIVISION 10 - SPECIALTIES

Not Applicable

DIVISION 11 - EQUIPMENT

Not Applicable

DIVISION 12 - FURNISHINGS

Not Applicable

DIVISION 13 - SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION

Not Applicable

DIVISION 14 - CONVEYING EQUIPMENT

Not Applicable

FACILITIES SERVICES SUBGROUP
DIVISION 20 – COMMON MECHANICAL REQUIREMENTS

20 0500
Common Work Results for Mechanical .......................................................................
1 thru 19
20 0513
Common Motor Requirements for Mechanical ............................................................
1 thru 7
20 0514
Variable Speed Drives .................................................................................................
1 thru 7
20 0519
Thermometers, Pressure Gauges, Meters and Accessories .......................................
1 thru 4
20 0523
Valves ..........................................................................................................................
1 thru 10
20 0529
Hangers and Supports for Mechanical ........................................................................
1 thru 12
20 0548
Vibration Control ..........................................................................................................
1 thru 5
20 0553
Mechanical Identification .............................................................................................
1 thru 3
20 0700
Mechanical Systems Insulation ...................................................................................
1 thru 6
20 1100
Plumbing and HVAC Piping.........................................................................................
1 thru 12

DIVISION 21 – FIRE SUPPRESSION
Not Applicable
DIVISION 22 – PLUMBING
Not Applicable
DIVISION 23 – HEATING, VENTILATING AND AIR-CONDITIONING (HVAC)

23 0593
Testing, Adjusting and Balancing for HVAC ................................................................
1 thru 30
23 0900
Instrumentation and Control for HVAC ........................................................................
1 thru 30
23 2116
Hydronic Piping Specialties .........................................................................................
1 thru 3
23 2123
Hydronic Pumps ..........................................................................................................
1 thru 5
23 2500
HVAC Water Treatment...............................................................................................
1 thru 7


23 6426	Rotary-Screw Water Chillers	1 thru 10

DIVISION 25 – INTEGRATED AUTOMATION

Not Applicable

DIVISION 26 - ELECTRICAL

26 0500
Common Work Results for Electrical ...........................................................................
1 thru 9
26 0519
Low Voltage Electrical Power Conductors and Cables (0-600V) ................................
1 thru 5
26 0526
Grounding and Bonding for Electrical Systems ...........................................................
1 thru 4
26 0533
Raceways and Boxes for Electrical Systems ..............................................................
1 thru 6
26 0553
Identification for Electrical Systems .............................................................................
1 thru 6
26 0800
Commissioning of Electrical Systems..........................................................................
1 thru 4
26 2726
Wiring Devices.............................................................................................................
1 thru 3
26 2813
Fuses ...........................................................................................................................
1 thru 2
26 2816
Enclosed Switches and Circuit Breakers .....................................................................
1 thru 2

DIVISION 27 THRU DIVISION 28
Not Applicable
DIVISION 31 – EARTHWORK
Not Applicable
DIVISION 32 – EXTERIOR IMPROVEMENTS
Not Applicable
DIVISION 33 – UTILITIES
Not Applicable

PROCESS EQUIPMENT SUBGROUP

DIVISION 40 – PROCESS INTEGRATION

Not Applicable


END OF TABLE OF CONTENTS



SECTION 01 1000 - SUMMARY

PART 1 - GENERAL

1.1

RELATED DOCUMENTS

A.
Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and other Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.
1.2

SUMMARY

A.
This Section includes the following:


Work Performed by Owner.
Owner-furnished/Contractor-installed (OFCI) products.
Owner-furnished/Owner-installed (OFOI) products.
Contractor's use of site and premises.
Coordination with occupants
Work restrictions.
Specification and Drawing conventions.
1.3

WORK PERFORMED BY OWNER (IF ANY)

A.
Cooperate fully with Owner, so work may be carried out smoothly, without interfering with or delaying Work under this Contract or work by Owner. Coordinate the Work of this Contract with work performed by Owner.
1.4

OWNER-FURNISHED/CONTRACTOR-INSTALLED (OFCI) PRODUCTS (If any)

A.
Owner's Responsibilities: Owner will furnish products indicated and perform the following, as applicable:


Provide to Contractor Owner-reviewed Product Data, Shop Drawings, and Samples.
Provide for delivery of Owner-furnished products to Project site.
Upon delivery, inspect, with Contractor present, delivered items.


a.	If Owner-furnished products are damaged, defective, or missing, arrange for replacement.


Obtain manufacturer's inspections, service, and warranties.
Inform Contractor of earliest available delivery date for Owner-furnished products.

B.
Contractor's Responsibilities: The Work includes the following, as applicable:


Designate delivery dates of Owner-furnished products in Contractor's construction schedule, utilizing Owner-furnished earliest available delivery dates.
Review Owner-reviewed Product Data, Shop Drawings, and Samples, noting discrepancies and other issues in providing for Owner-furnished products in the Work.
Receive, unload, handle, store, protect, and install Owner-furnished products.
Make building services connections for Owner-furnished products.
Protect Owner-furnished products from damage during storage, handling, and installation and prior to Substantial Completion.
Repair or replace Owner-furnished products damaged following receipt.
1.5

OWNER-FURNISHED/OWNER-INSTALLED (OFOI) PRODUCTS (If any)

A.
The Owner will furnish and install products indicated.


CONTRACTOR'S USE OF SITE AND PREMISES

Limits on Use of Site: Limit use of Project site to Work in areas indicated. Do not disturb portions of Project site beyond areas in which the Work is indicated.

Driveways, Walkways and Entrances: Keep driveways, loading areas, and entrances serving premises clear and available to Owner, Owner's employees, and emergency vehicles at all times. Do not use these areas for parking or for storage of materials.

Schedule deliveries to minimize use of driveways and entrances by construction operations.
Schedule deliveries to minimize space and time requirements for storage of materials and equipment on-site.

Condition of Existing Building: Maintain portions of existing building affected by construction operations in a weathertight condition throughout construction period. Repair damage caused by construction operations.

Condition of Existing Grounds: Maintain portions of existing grounds, landscaping, and hardscaping affected by construction operations throughout construction period. Repair damage caused by construction operations.

COORDINATION WITH OCCUPANTS

Partial Owner Occupancy: Owner will occupy the premises during entire construction period, with the exception of areas under construction. Cooperate with Owner during construction operations to minimize conflicts and facilitate Owner usage. Perform the Work so as not to interfere with Owner's operations. Maintain existing exits unless otherwise indicated.

Maintain access to existing walkways, corridors, and other adjacent occupied or used facilities. Do not close or obstruct walkways, corridors, or other occupied or used facilities without written permission from Owner and authorities having jurisdiction.
Provide not less than 72 hours' notice to Owner of activities that will affect Owner's operations.

WORK RESTRICTIONS

Comply with restrictions on construction operations.

Comply with limitations on use of public streets, work on public streets, rights of way, and other requirements of authorities having jurisdiction.

On-Site Work Hours: Limit work to between 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, unless otherwise indicated or required by Owner. Work hours may be modified to meet Project requirements if approved by Owner and authorities having jurisdiction.

Weekend Hours (Saturday and Sunday): 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m; subject to Owner approval.

Existing Utility Interruptions: Do not interrupt utilities serving facilities occupied by Owner or others unless permitted under the following conditions and then only after arranging for temporary utility services according to requirements indicated:

Notify Architect, Construction Manager, and Owner not less than two days in advance of proposed utility interruptions.
Obtain Owner's written permission before proceeding with utility interruptions.


Noise, Vibration, Dust, and Odors: Coordinate operations that may result in high levels of noise and vibration, dust, odors, or other disruption to Owner occupancy with Owner.

Notify Construction Manager and Owner not less than two days in advance of proposed disruptive operations.
Obtain Owner's written permission before proceeding with disruptive operations.

Smoking and Controlled Substance Restrictions: Use of tobacco products, alcoholic beverages, and other controlled substances on Project site on Owner's property is not permitted.

Employee Identification: Provide identification tags for Contractor personnel working on Project site. Require personnel to use identification tags at all times.

SPECIFICATION AND DRAWING CONVENTIONS

Specification Content: The Specifications use certain conventions for the style of language and the intended meaning of certain terms, words, and phrases when used in particular situations. These conventions are as follows:

Imperative mood and streamlined language are generally used in the Specifications. The words "shall," "shall be," or "shall comply with," depending on the context, are implied where a colon (:) is used within a sentence or phrase.
Text Color: Text used in the Specifications, including units of measure, manufacturer and product names, and other text may appear in multiple colors or underlined as part of a hyperlink; no emphasis is implied by text with these characteristics.
Hypertext: Text used in the Specifications may contain hyperlinks. Hyperlinks may allow for access to linked information that is not residing in the Specifications. Unless otherwise indicated, linked information is not part of the Contract Documents.
Specification requirements are to be performed by Contractor unless specifically stated otherwise.

Division 00 Contracting Requirements: General provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions, apply to all Sections of the Specifications.

Conflicting Requirements within Division 00: Division 00 Sections contained within this volume, listed in this volume’s Table of Contents, and authored by the Architect, take precedence over other Division 00 Sections including, but not limited to, sections authored by the Construction Manager; regardless of any language stating otherwise.

Division 01 General Requirements: Requirements of Sections in Division 01 apply to the Work of all Sections in the Specifications.

Conflicting Requirements within Division 01: Division 01 Sections contained within this volume, listed in this volume’s Table of Contents, and authored by the Architect, take precedence over other Division 01 Sections including, but not limited to, sections authored by the Construction Manager; regardless of any language stating otherwise.

Drawing Coordination: Requirements for materials and products identified on Drawings are described in detail in the Specifications. One or more of the following are used on Drawings to identify materials and products:

Terminology: Materials and products are identified by the typical generic terms used in the individual Specifications Sections.
Abbreviations: Materials and products are identified by abbreviations scheduled on Drawings.
Keynoting: Materials and products are identified by reference keynotes referencing Specification Section numbers found in this Project Manual.


PART 2 - PRODUCTS (NOT USED) PART 3 - EXECUTION (NOT USED)

END OF SECTION 01 1000


SECTION 01 2500 – SUBSTITUTION PROCEDURES

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and other Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

Section includes administrative and procedural requirements for substitutions.

DEFINITIONS

Substitutions: Changes in products, materials, equipment, and methods of construction from those required by the Contract Documents.

Substitutions for Cause: Changes proposed by Contractor that are required due to changed Project conditions, such as unavailability of product, regulatory changes, or unavailability of required warranty terms.
Substitutions for Convenience: Changes proposed by Contractor or Owner that are not required to meet other Project requirements but may offer advantage to Contractor or Owner.

ACTION SUBMITTALS

Substitution Requests: Submit documentation identifying product or fabrication or installation method to be replaced. Include Specification Section number and title and Drawing numbers and titles.

Substitution Request Form: Use 01 2500.01 – Substitution Request From, provided in Project Manual.
Documentation: Show compliance with requirements for substitutions and the following, as applicable:

Provide the following with all Substitution Requests. Substitution Requests without the following information will be rejected.

Product Data, including drawings and descriptions of products and fabrication and installation procedures.
Point-by-point, Comparative Data: Provide detailed comparison of significant qualities of proposed substitutions with those of the Work specified. Significant qualities may include attributes, such as performance, weight, size, durability, visual effect, sustainable design characteristics, warranties, and specific features and requirements indicated. Indicate deviations, if any, from the Work specified.

Provide detailed comparison on a single page. Include side-by-side, itemized, comparative data of specified product and proposed Substitution comparing essential attributes specified. Alternatively provide annotated copy of applicable Specification Section indicating differences.

Statement indicating why specified product or fabrication, or installation method cannot be provided, if applicable.
Coordination of information, including a list of changes or revisions needed to other parts of the Work and to construction performed by Owner and separate contractors that will be necessary to accommodate proposed substitution.
Samples, where applicable or requested.
Certificates and qualification data, where applicable or requested.


List of similar installations for completed projects, with project names and addresses as well as names and addresses of architects and owners.
Material test reports from a qualified testing agency, indicating and interpreting test results for compliance with requirements indicated.
Research reports evidencing compliance with building code in effect for Project, from ICC- ES.
Detailed comparison of Contractor's construction schedule using proposed substitutions with products specified for the Work, including effect on the overall Contract Time. If specified product or method of construction cannot be provided within the Contract Time, include letter from manufacturer, on manufacturer's letterhead, stating date of receipt of purchase order, lack of availability, or delays in delivery.
Cost information, including a proposal of change, if any, in the Contract Sum.
Contractor's certification that proposed substitution complies with requirements in the Contract Documents, except as indicated in substitution request, is compatible with related materials and is appropriate for applications indicated.
Contractor's waiver of rights to additional payment or time that may subsequently become necessary because of failure of proposed substitution to produce indicated results.

Architect's Action: If necessary, Architect will request additional information or documentation for evaluation within seven days of receipt of a request for substitution. Architect will notify Contractor through Construction Manager of acceptance or rejection of proposed substitution within 15 days of receipt of request, or seven days of receipt of additional information or documentation, whichever is later.

Forms of Acceptance: Change Order, Construction Change Directive, or Architect's Supplemental Instructions for minor changes in the Work.
Use product specified if Architect does not issue a decision on use of a proposed substitution within time allocated.

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Compatibility of Substitutions: Investigate and document compatibility of proposed substitution with related products and materials. Engage a qualified testing agency to perform compatibility tests recommended by manufacturers.

PROCEDURES

Coordination: Revise or adjust affected work as necessary to integrate work of the approved substitutions.

SUBSTITUTIONS

Substitutions for Cause: Submit requests for substitution immediately on discovery of need for change, but not later than 15 days prior to time required for preparation and review of related submittals.

Conditions: Architect will consider Contractor's request for substitution when the following conditions are satisfied. If the following conditions are not satisfied, Architect will return requests without action, except to record noncompliance with these requirements:

Requested substitution is consistent with the Contract Documents and will produce indicated results.
Substitution request is fully documented and properly submitted.
Requested substitution will not adversely affect Contractor's construction schedule.
Requested substitution has received necessary approvals of authorities having jurisdiction.
Requested substitution is compatible with other portions of the Work.
Requested substitution has been coordinated with other portions of the Work.
Requested substitution provides specified warranty.


If requested substitution involves more than one contractor, requested substitution has been coordinated with other portions of the Work, is uniform and consistent, is compatible with other products, and is acceptable to all contractors involved.

Substitutions for Convenience: Architect will consider requests for substitution if received within 60 days after commencement of the Work. Requests received after that time may be considered or rejected at discretion of Architect.

Conditions: Architect will consider Contractor's request for substitution when the following conditions are satisfied. If the following conditions are not satisfied, Architect will return requests without action, except to record noncompliance with these requirements:

Requested substitution offers Owner a substantial advantage in cost, time, energy conservation, or other considerations, after deducting additional responsibilities Owner must assume. Owner's additional responsibilities may include compensation to Architect for redesign and evaluation services, increased cost of other construction by Owner, and similar considerations.
Requested substitution does not require extensive revisions to the Contract Documents.
Requested substitution is consistent with the Contract Documents and will produce indicated results.
Substitution request is fully documented and properly submitted.
Requested substitution will not adversely affect Contractor's construction schedule.
Requested substitution has received necessary approvals of authorities having jurisdiction.
Requested substitution is compatible with other portions of the Work.
Requested substitution has been coordinated with other portions of the Work.
Requested substitution provides specified warranty.
If requested substitution involves more than one contractor, requested substitution has been coordinated with other portions of the Work, is uniform and consistent, is compatible with other products, and is acceptable to all contractors involved.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS (NOT USED) PART 3 - EXECUTION (NOT USED)

END OF SECTION 01 2500


SUBSTITUTION REQUEST FORM

Substitution Request Number: 		Date Submitted: 	
IDS Project Number: 	
Project Name:		

SPECIFIED ITEM
Specification Title: 	
Specification Section No.: 	 Specification Article / Paragraph: 	
Specified Item / Description: 	
Specified Manufacturer: 	 Specified Item / Model: 	
Reason for not providing specified item (If after Bidding): 	



PROPOSED SUBSTITUTION

Proposed Substitution: 	

Proposed Manufacturer: 	 Proposed Item / Model: 	

Manufacturer’s Website: 	

Manufacturer’s Address: 	

Years manufacturer has been in business: 	 Years item / model has been manufactured: 	

Differences between proposed Substitution and specified item: 	



Will proposed Substitution affect other parts of work?	☐ No	☐ Yes

If Yes, provide explanation: 	



Benefit of proposed Substitution (If after Bidding):	☐ Cost savings	☐ Time savings	☐ Other Provide explanation of Benefit: 				


IDS Project Number: 	



Provide the following information. Check box to indicate information has been attached. Substitution Requests without the following information will be rejected.

Product data sheets.
Point-by-point, comparative data.
Provide side-by-side, itemized, comparative data of specified product and proposed Substitution comparing essential attributes specified (gages, sizes, performance requirements, finishes, etc.). Alternatively provide annotated copy of applicable Specification Section indicating differences.

Indicate if any additional information is attached:
Applicable certificates and test reports.	☐ List of References where proposed product is installed.
Drawings.	☐ Samples.	☐ Other Items: 	


SUBMITTED BY
The Undersigned certifies, except as otherwise indicated in Substitution Request:
Substitution is equal or superior in all respects to specified product.
Substitution complies with requirements in the Contract Documents, is compatible with related materials, and is appropriate for applications indicated.
Same warranty will be provided for the Substitution as for the specified product.
Same or equivalent maintenance service and source of replacement parts, as applicable, shall be available.
Substitution will have no adverse effect on other trades and will not affect or delay project schedule.
Substitution will not affect dimensions and functional clearances.
Undersigned agrees to coordinate installation of the Substitution and any changes in the Work as necessary for installation of the Substitution.
Costs for changes to the Work and any other costs caused by the Substitution; including, but not limited to, A/E design changes, detailing, and dimensioning, shall be paid by the undersigned.
Undersigned waives claims for additional costs and time extensions that may subsequently become apparent after Substitution is approved.

Contractor / Company: 	

Signed By: 	 Printed Name: 	

Title: 	 Date: 	

Address: 	

Email: 	 Phone: 	


ARCHITECT’S RESPONSE

During bidding, Architect will approve Substitution by issuing an Addendum, Substitutions not approved by addendum are rejected.
During construction, Architect will notify Contractor in writing (see below) of decision to accept or reject a Substitution. Accepted Substitutions shall be incorporated into the Work by Change Order, Construction Change Directive, Architectural Supplementary Instructions, or similar instruments as provided for in the Conditions of the Contract.

Substitution Approved - Provide submittals in accordance with Specification Section 01 3000 – Submittal Procedures, as noted by Architect in Substitution Request, and in accordance with respective section for which substitution was made.

Substitution Rejected - Provide specified materials.

Signed By: 	 Printed Name: 	

Architect’s Comments: 	



	 Date: 	


SECTION 01 3300 - SUBMITTAL PROCEDURES

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and other Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

Section Includes:

Submittal schedule requirements.
Administrative and procedural requirements for submittals.
Submittal Form.
CAD/BIM File Release Form.

DEFINITIONS

Action Submittals: Written and graphic information and physical samples that require Architect's responsive action. Action submittals are those submittals indicated in individual Specification Sections as "action submittals."

Informational Submittals: Written and graphic information and physical samples that do not require Architect’s responsive action. Submittals may be rejected for not complying with requirements. Informational submittals are those submittals indicated in individual Specification Sections as "informational submittals."

Portable Document Format (PDF): An open standard file format licensed by Adobe Systems used for representing documents in a device-independent and display resolution-independent fixed-layout document format.

SUBMITTAL SCHEDULE

Submittal Schedule: Submit, as an action submittal, a list of submittals, arranged in chronological order by dates required by construction schedule. Include time required for review, ordering, manufacturing, fabrication, and delivery when establishing dates. Include additional time required for making corrections or revisions to submittals noted by Architect and additional time for handling and reviewing submittals required by those corrections.

Coordinate submittal schedule with list of subcontracts, the schedule of values, and Contractor's construction schedule.
Submit revised submittal schedule as required to reflect changes in current status and timing for submittals.
Format: Arrange the following information in a tabular format:

Scheduled date for first submittal.
Specification Section number and title.
Submittal Category: Action; informational.
Name of subcontractor.
Description of the Work covered.
Scheduled date for Architect's final release or approval.


SUBMITTAL FORMATS

Submittals shall be electronic, unless otherwise indicated.

Prepare submittals as a single PDF package, incorporating complete information into PDF file.

Name PDF file with submittal number.

Submittal Information: Include the following information in each submittal:

Project name.
Date.
Name of Architect.
Name of Construction Manager.
Name of Contractor.
Name of firm or entity that prepared submittal.
Names of subcontractor, manufacturer, and supplier.
Unique submittal number, including revision identifier. Include Specification Section number with sequential alphanumeric identifier and alphanumeric suffix for resubmittals.
Category and type of submittal.
Submittal purpose and description.
Number and title of Specification Section, with paragraph number and generic name for each of multiple items.
Drawing number and detail references, as appropriate.
Indication of full or partial submittal.
Location(s) where product is to be installed, as appropriate.
Other necessary identification.
Remarks.
Signature of transmitter.

Options: Identify options requiring selection by Architect.

Deviations and Additional Information: On each submittal, clearly indicate deviations from requirements in the Contract Documents, including minor variations and limitations; include relevant additional information and revisions, other than those requested by Architect on previous submittals. Indicate by highlighting on each submittal or noting on attached separate sheet.

SUBMITTAL PROCEDURES

Prepare and submit submittals required by individual Specification Sections. Types of submittals are indicated in individual Specification Sections.

Email: Prepare each submittal as a single PDF package and transmit to Architect, through Construction Manager, by sending via email.

Send submittals to the following email address:

shop_drawings@ids-michigan.com

Subject Line: The Subject line of email should indicate the IDS project number, the project name, and specification section number (In this order).
IDS submittal form must be completed and included at the beginning of, and in the same PDF, as the submittal.
Submit only one specification section in each e-mail.
Architect, through Construction Manager, will return review comments in a PDF file.


Web-Based Project Management Software: When used for a Project, prepare submittals in PDF form, and upload to web-based Project management software website instead of using email.

Enter required data in web-based software site to fully identify submittal.
IDS submittal form must be completed and included at the beginning of, and in the same PDF, as the submittal.
Submit only one specification section in each e-mail.

Submittal Form:

Refer to copy of form at the end of this Section.

Additionally, at construction kick-off meeting the Architect will transmit the Submittal Form to the Contractor in both Word and PDF format.

Complete and fill out the following information on the submittal form.

Item (1) – Project Title/Location: Refer to Title Page of specifications. Include Bid Package number, if applicable.
Item (2) – From/Return to: Contractor’s/Construction Manager’s name and address to whom submittal is to be returned
Item (3) - IDS Project No.: Integrated Design Solutions’ project number.
Item (4) - Submittal Date:
Item (5) - Submittal Number: Use 1, 2, 3, etc. for easy reference of each separate submittal.
Item (6) - If this is a Partial Submittal of this item, check the box and use “1.1”, “1.2”, etc. in the submittal number space. If this is a complete submittal, do not check box.
Item (7) - If this is a resubmittal (revision to a previous submittal), check the box and use the original submittal number and number the submittal “1A”, “1B”, etc in the submittal number space. If this is a new submittal, do not check box.
Item (8) – Project Manual Section No.: Indicate the Project Manual Specification Section number relating to the submittal
Item (9) – Product Manufacturer: Insert name of product manufacturer.
Item (10) - Item Description (specific information, not just “drawings”, i.e. Curtainwall Shop Drawings.
Item (11) – Number of copies. Indicate the number of copies, product data, samples, etc. of each item being submitted.
Item (12) – Contractor’s/Construction Manager’s Remarks & Deviations (if any): Indicate appropriate remarks and note any deviations from the requirements of the Contract Documents, as required, and sign the certification that all submittals have been reviewed.
Item (13) – Addendum or Bulletin (if any): Indicate if submittal information is based on an addendum or bulletin. Indicate number of issue.
Item (14) – Substitution (if any): Indicate whether the submittal was approved under a separate Substitution

Coordination: Coordinate preparation and processing of submittals with performance of construction activities.

Coordinate each submittal with fabrication, purchasing, testing, delivery, other submittals, and related activities that require sequential activity.
Submit all submittal items required for each Specification Section concurrently unless partial submittals for portions of the Work are indicated on approved submittal schedule.
Submit action submittals and informational submittals required by the same Specification Section as separate packages under separate transmittals.
Coordinate transmittal of submittals for related parts of the Work specified in different Sections, so processing will not be delayed because of need to review submittals concurrently for coordination.

Architect reserves the right to withhold action on a submittal requiring coordination with other submittals until related submittals are received.


Processing Time: Allow time for submittal review, including time for resubmittals, as follows. Time for review shall commence on Architect's receipt of submittal. No extension of the Contract Time will be authorized because of failure to transmit submittals enough in advance of the Work to permit processing, including resubmittals.

Initial Review: Allow 15 days for initial review of each submittal. Allow additional time if coordination with subsequent submittals is required. Architect, through Construction Manager, will advise Contractor when a submittal being processed must be delayed for coordination.
Resubmittal Review: Allow 15 days for review of each resubmittal.
Sequential Review: Where sequential review of submittals by Architect's consultants, Owner, or other parties is required, allow 21 days for initial review of each submittal.

Resubmittals: Make resubmittals in same format as initial submittal.

Note date and content of previous submittal.
Note date and content of revision in label or title block, and clearly indicate extent of revision.
Resubmit submittals until they are marked with approval notation from Architect's action stamp.

Distribution: Furnish copies of final submittals to manufacturers, subcontractors, suppliers, fabricators, installers, authorities having jurisdiction, and others as necessary for performance of construction activities. Show distribution on transmittal forms.

Use for Construction: Retain complete copies of submittals on Project site. Use only final action submittals that are marked with approval notation from Architect's action stamp.

SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS

Product Data: Collect information into a single submittal for each element of construction and type of product or equipment.

If information must be specially prepared for submittal because standard published data are unsuitable for use, submit as Shop Drawings, not as Product Data.
Mark each copy of each submittal to show which products and options are applicable.
Include the following information, as applicable:

Manufacturer's catalog cuts.
Manufacturer's product specifications.
Standard color charts.
Statement of compliance with specified referenced standards.
Testing by recognized testing agency.
Application of testing agency labels and seals.
Notation of coordination requirements.
Availability and delivery time information.

For equipment, include the following in addition to the above, as applicable:

Wiring diagrams that show factory-installed wiring.
Printed performance curves.
Operational range diagrams.
Clearances required to other construction, if not indicated on accompanying Shop Drawings.

Submit Product Data before Shop Drawings, and before or concurrently with Samples.


Shop Drawings: Prepare Project-specific information, drawn accurately to scale. Do not base Shop Drawings on reproductions of the Contract Documents or standard printed data.

Preparation: Fully illustrate requirements in the Contract Documents. Include the following information, as applicable:

Identification of products.
Schedules.
Compliance with specified standards.
Notation of coordination requirements.
Notation of dimensions established by field measurement.
Relationship and attachment to adjoining construction clearly indicated.
Seal and signature of professional engineer if specified.

Samples: Submit Samples for review of type, color, pattern, and texture for a check of these characteristics with other materials.

Transmit Samples that contain multiple, related components, such as accessories together in one submittal package.
Identification: Permanently attach label on unexposed side of Samples that includes the following:

Project name and submittal number.
Generic description of Sample.
Product name and name of manufacturer.
Sample source.
Number and title of applicable Specification Section.
Specification paragraph number and generic name of each item.

Email or Web-Based Transmittal: Provide PDF transmittal. Include digital image illustrating Sample characteristics and identification information for record.

In addition to electronic submittal, submit actual physical samples.

Disposition: Maintain sets of approved Samples at Project site, available for quality-control comparisons throughout the course of construction activity. Sample sets may be used to determine final acceptance of construction associated with each set.

Samples that may be incorporated into the Work are indicated in individual Specification Sections. Such Samples must be in an undamaged condition at time of use.
Samples not incorporated into the Work, or otherwise designated as Owner's property, are the property of Contractor.

Samples for Initial Selection: Submit manufacturer's color charts consisting of units or sections of units, showing the full range of colors, textures, and patterns available.

Number of Samples: Submit one full set(s) of available choices where color, pattern, texture, or similar characteristics are required to be selected from manufacturer's product line. Architect, through Construction Manager, will return submittal with options selected.


Samples for Verification: Submit full-size units or Samples of size indicated, prepared from same material to be used for the Work, cured and finished in manner specified, and physically identical with material or product proposed for use, and that show full range of color and texture variations expected. Samples include, but are not limited to, the following: partial sections of manufactured or fabricated components; small cuts or containers of materials; complete units of repetitively used materials; swatches showing color, texture, and pattern; color range sets; and components used for independent testing and inspection.

Number of Samples: Submit three sets of Samples. Architect and Construction Manager will retain two Sample sets; remainder will be returned. Mark up and retain one returned Sample set as a project record Sample.

If variation in color, pattern, texture, or other characteristic is inherent in material or product represented by a Sample, submit at least three sets of paired units that show approximate limits of variations.

Product Schedule: As required in individual Specification Sections, prepare a written summary indicating types of products required for the Work and their intended location. Include the following information in tabular form:

Type of product. Include unique identifier for each product indicated in the Contract Documents or assigned by Contractor if none is indicated.
Manufacturer and product name, and model number if applicable.
Number and name of room or space.
Location within room or space.

Qualification Data: Prepare written information that demonstrates capabilities and experience of firm or person. Include lists of completed projects with project names and addresses, contact information of architects and owners, and other information specified.

Design Data: Prepare and submit written and graphic information indicating compliance with indicated performance and design criteria in individual Specification Sections. Include list of assumptions and summary of loads. Include load diagrams if applicable. Provide name and version of software, if any, used for calculations. Number each page of submittal.

Certificates:

Certificates and Certifications Submittals: Submit a statement that includes signature of entity responsible for preparing certification. Certificates and certifications shall be signed by an officer or other individual authorized to sign documents on behalf of that entity. Provide a notarized signature where indicated.
Installer Certificates: Submit written statements on manufacturer's letterhead, certifying that Installer complies with requirements in the Contract Documents and, where required, is authorized by manufacturer for this specific Project.
Manufacturer Certificates: Submit written statements on manufacturer's letterhead, certifying that manufacturer complies with requirements in the Contract Documents. Include evidence of manufacturing experience where required.
Material Certificates: Submit written statements on manufacturer's letterhead, certifying that material complies with requirements in the Contract Documents.
Product Certificates: Submit written statements on manufacturer's letterhead, certifying that product complies with requirements in the Contract Documents.
Welding Certificates: Prepare written certification that welding procedures and personnel comply with requirements in the Contract Documents. Submit record of AWS B2.1/B2.1M on AWS forms. Include names of firms and personnel certified.


Test and Research Reports:

Compatibility Test Reports: Submit reports written by a qualified testing agency, on testing agency's standard form, indicating and interpreting results of compatibility tests performed before installation of product. Include written recommendations for substrate preparation and primers required.
Field Test Reports: Submit written reports indicating and interpreting results of field tests performed either during installation of product or after product is installed in its final location, for compliance with requirements in the Contract Documents.
Material Test Reports: Submit reports written by a qualified testing agency, on testing agency's standard form, indicating and interpreting test results of material for compliance with requirements in the Contract Documents.
Preconstruction Test Reports: Submit reports written by a qualified testing agency, on testing agency's standard form, indicating and interpreting results of tests performed before installation of product, for compliance with performance requirements in the Contract Documents.
Product Test Reports: Submit written reports indicating that current product produced by manufacturer complies with requirements in the Contract Documents. Base reports on evaluation of tests performed by manufacturer and witnessed by a qualified testing agency, or on comprehensive tests performed by a qualified testing agency.
Research Reports: Submit written evidence, from a model code organization acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction, that product complies with building code in effect for Project. Include the following information:

Name of evaluation organization.
Date of evaluation.
Time period when report is in effect.
Product and manufacturers' names.
Description of product.
Test procedures and results.
Limitations of use.

DELEGATED-DESIGN SERVICES

Performance and Design Criteria: Where professional design services or certifications by a design professional are specifically required of Contractor by the Contract Documents, provide products and systems complying with specific performance and design criteria indicated.

If criteria indicated are insufficient to perform services or certification required, submit a written request for additional information to Architect.

Delegated-Design Services Certification: In addition to Shop Drawings, Product Data, and other required submittals, submit digitally signed PDF file for each product and system specifically assigned to Contractor to be designed or certified by a design professional.

Indicate that products and systems comply with performance and design criteria in the Contract Documents. Include list of codes, loads, and other factors used in performing these services.
When requested by Architect, provide three paper copies of certificate, signed and sealed by the responsible design professional

CONTRACTOR'S REVIEW

Action Submittals and Informational Submittals: Review each submittal and check for coordination with other Work of the Contract and for compliance with the Contract Documents. Note corrections and field dimensions. Mark with approval stamp before submitting to Architect.


Contractor's Approval: Indicate Contractor's approval for each submittal with a uniform approval stamp. Include name of reviewer, date of Contractor's approval, and statement certifying that submittal has been reviewed, checked, and approved for compliance with the Contract Documents.

Architect will not review submittals received from Contractor that do not have Contractor's review and approval.

ARCHITECT'S REVIEW

Action Submittals: Architect will review each submittal, indicate corrections or revisions required, and return.

Architect will indicate, via markup on each submittal, the appropriate action, as follows:

No Exceptions Taken: Work covered by the submittal may proceed provided it complies with requirements of the Contract Documents. Final payment depends on that compliance.
Exceptions As Noted: Work covered by the submittal may proceed provided it complies with notations or corrections on the submittal and requirements of the Contract Documents. Final payment depends on that compliance.
Revise and Resubmit: Do not proceed with Work covered by the submittal, including purchasing, fabrication, delivery, or other activity. Revise submittal according to the notations or corrections; resubmit without delay. Repeat as necessary, until “No Exceptions Taken” or “Exceptions As Noted” review mark is obtained.

Do not use, or allow others to use, submittals marked "Revise and Resubmit" at the Project Site or elsewhere where Work is in progress.

Rejected: Do not proceed with Work covered by the submittal, including purchasing, fabrication, delivery, or other activity. Revise or prepare a new submittal according to the notations; resubmit without delay. Repeat as necessary, until “No Exceptions Taken” or “Exceptions As Noted” review mark is obtained.

Do not use, or allow others to use, submittals marked "Rejected" at the Project Site or elsewhere where Work is in progress.

Action Not Required: Indicates that no action is required. Submittal has been received for record only.

Informational Submittals: Architect will review each submittal and will not return it or will return it if it does not comply with requirements. Architect will forward each submittal to appropriate party.

Partial submittals prepared for a portion of the Work will be reviewed when use of partial submittals has received prior approval from Architect and Construction Manager.

Incomplete submittals are unacceptable, will be considered nonresponsive, and will be returned for resubmittal without review.

Architect will return without review submittals received from sources other than Contractor.

Submittals not required by the Contract Documents will be returned by Architect without action.


CAD/BIM FILE RELEASE FORM

Contractor's use of architect's computer-aided drafting (CAD) or building information modeling (BIM) files.

At Contractor's written request, copies of Architect's Computer-Aided Drafting (CAD) or Building Information Modeling (BIM) files will be provided to Contractor for Contractor's use in connection with Project, subject to the following conditions:

Contractor shall submit a fully executed “Request for Integrated Design Solutions, LLC (IDS) from Contractor For Transfer of Computer-Aided Drafting (CAD) or Building Information Modeling (BIM) Files on Electronic Media” form indicating acceptance of the terms and conditions therein.

Refer to copy of form at the end of this Section.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS (NOT USED) PART 3 - EXECUTION (NOT USED)

END OF SECTION 01 3300

 SUBMITTAL FORM	


Partial (6)   Resubmittal (7)






Item Description (10)
Print (11)
Product Data
Sample
Other




A




M




E




EN




S




C




DN




FS




IN




TE



























































































INSTRUCTIONS
Use this form for all submittals. Integrated Design Solutions, will furnish the Contractor/Construction Manager with forms.

Organize submittals by Specification Section. Use a separate form for submittals of each Specification Section. DO NOT SUBMIT ITEMS SPECIFIED IN DIFFERENT SPECIFICATION SECTIONS ON ONE SUBMITTAL FORM.

Fill in submittal form as follows:

Project Title and Location. (Refer to Title Page of specifications. Include Bid Package number, if applicable.)

Contractor’s/Construction Manager’s name and address to whom submittal is to be returned.

Integrated Design Solutions’ project number.

Submittal Date.

Submittal Number: Use 1, 2, 3, etc. for easy reference of each separate submittal.

If this is a Partial Submittal of this item, check the box and use “1.1”, “1.2”, etc. in the submittal number space. If this is a complete submittal, do not check box.

If this is a resubmittal (revision to a previous submittal), check the box and use the original submittal number and number the submittal “1A”, “1B”, etc in the submittal number space. If this is a new submittal, do not check box.

Indicate the Project Manual Specification Section number relating to the submittal.

Manufacturer: Insert name of product manufacturer, (e.g., Liebert).

Item Description: Insert a brief statement describing the submitted item in generic terms (e.g. Ceramic Mosaic Tile, etc.) with a list of all drawings or identifying numbers.

No. of Copies: Indicate the number of copies, product data, samples, etc. of each item being submitted (e.g. prints-2, reproducible-1, etc.).

Indicate appropriate remarks and note any deviations from the requirements of the Contract Documents, as required, and sign the certification that all submittals have been reviewed.

Indicate if submittal information is based on an addendum or bulletin. Indicate number of issue.

Indicate whether the submittal was approved under a separate Substitution Request.

The balance of this form will be filled in by Integrated Design Solutions, and returned to the Contractor along with the submittal.




Request for Integrated Design Solutions, LLC (IDS) from Contractor For Transfer of Computer-Aided Drafting (CAD) or Building Information Modeling (BIM) Files on Electronic Media

Project Administrator:			Contractors:		 IDS Project Number:					
Construction
Project Name:
		Manager:		
Location:					 Bid Package Number			Date:		
IDS is requested to provide the following CAD/BIM files, as listed, for the named project, for the convenience of the contractor in preparing shop fabrication drawings:
Drawing No./BIM File Discipline	Drawing Title	Issue Date of Drawing/BIM File




Drawings were prepared on the following:
Software: 		Operating System: 	 Check appropriate format for requested files.
DWG 		DXF 		IGES 		NWD 		RVT 		DGN 	
TERMS AND CONDITIONS
IDS makes no representation as to the compatibility of the CAD/BIM files with any hardware or software.
Since the information set forth on the CAD/BIM files can be modified unintentionally or otherwise, IDS reserves the right to remove all indicia of its ownership and/or involvement from each electronic display.
Contractor will use figured dimensions only and will not “pull” dimensions from the CAD/BIM files.
All information on the CAD/BIM files is considered instruments of service of IDS and shall not be used for other projects, for additions to this project, or completion of this project by others. CAD/BIM files shall remain the property of IDS, and in no case shall the transfer of these files be considered a sale.
IDS makes no representation regarding the accuracy, completeness, or permanence of CAD/BIM files, nor for their merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. Addenda information or revisions made after the date indicated on the CAD/BIM files may not have been incorporated. In the event of a conflict between IDS’ sealed contract drawings and CAD/BIM files, the sealed contract drawings shall govern. It is the Contractor’s responsibility to determine if any conflict exists. The CAD/BIM files shall not be considered to be Contract Documents as defined by the General Conditions of the Contract for Construction.
The use of CAD/BIM files prepared by IDS shall not in any way obviate the Contractor’s responsibility for the proper checking and coordination of dimensions, details, member sizes and gage, and quantities of materials as required to facilitate complete and accurate construction of the project.


The Contractor/Construction Manager shall, to the fullest extent permitted by law, indemnify, defend and hold harmless IDS and its subconsultants from all claims, damages, losses, expenses, penalties and liabilities of any kind, including attorney’s fees, arising out of or resulting from the use of CAD/BIM files by the Contractor, or by third party recipients of the CAD/BIM files from the Contractor.
IDS believes that no licensing or copyright fees are due to others on account of the transfer of the CAD/BIM files, but to the extent any are, the Contractor will pay the appropriate fees and hold IDS harmless from such claims.
Any purchase order number provided by the Contractor is for the Contractor’s accounting purposes only. Purchase order terms and conditions are void and are not a part of this agreement.
This agreement shall be governed by the laws of the State of Michigan.
3D TERMS OF USE
The 3D Computer Model(s), including but not limited to related calculation modeling and material, for the Project is provided by IDS as defined above to the User/Recipient as defined above (individually, a “User”, or collectively, “Users”) at the User’s request subject to the terms and conditions stated below (the “Terms of Use”). User hereby acknowledges and agrees to the following terms and conditions.
The 3D Model is made available to User solely as a convenience to the User and for informational purposes only. The User is not to rely upon the 3D Computer Model and the data and/or information contained therein in preparing any of its documents for the Project. The User acknowledges that the 3D Computer Model is not a part of the Construction or Contract Documents for the Project and that IDS makes no representations or warranties, expressed or implied, regarding the 3D Computer Model, the accuracy or completeness of the 3D Computer Model or the data and/or information contained therein. It is agreed that the 3D Computer Model is generated for the purposes of assisting in the construction of the Project, the sealed construction drawings/instruments of service ultimately govern the design and the construction of the Project. The construction drawings/instruments of service trump the 3D Computer Model as the ultimate authority for the design and construction of the Project and are the Project’s governing documents.
The User agrees that these terms apply to the 3D Model in its entirety, together with all of its component parts and data. The User acknowledges that the requirements of these Terms of Use apply to all of User’s principals, employees, agents, consultants, and trade contractors, including all subcontractors.
The User agrees that the use of the 3D Computer Model is solely at the User’s risk and that the User assumes full responsibility and liability in connection with the User’s use of the 3D Computer Model and the information and/or data contained therein. The User agrees that IDS has no responsibility for any deficiencies, inaccuracies, errors and/or omissions contained in the 3D Computer Model or the data and/or information contained therein. IDS has no responsibility for any deficiencies or defects in the User’s documents, work and/or services resulting from the User’s use of the 3D Computer Model in lieu of the Construction and/or Contract Documents for the Project.
The User acknowledges and agrees a) that the use of the 3D Computer Model is not a substitute for professional judgment, b) that the use of the 3D Computer Model does not relieve the User from applying the appropriate standard of care and skill relevant to the use of the 3D Computer Model and its contents; c) that the 3D Computer Model is only to be used as a tool to assist the User in connection with the Project; d) that the User is solely responsible for verifying the accuracy of all results created with the use of the 3D Computer Model; and e) IDS is not responsible or liable for the means and methods of construction and the User’s use of the 3D Computer Model shall in no way give rise to such duty or liability by IDS or its consultants.
IDS AND ITS CONSULTANTS SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES WHETHER EXPRESSED, IMPLIED OR STATUTORY, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, ALL WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, TITLE, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, CONSTRUCTABILITY, NON-INFRINGEMENT, COMPATIBILITY, SECURITY OR ACCURACY. USERS’ USE OF THE 3D COMPUTER MODEL IS AT ITS OWN RISK. USER ASSUMES FULL RESPONSIBILITY AND RISK OF LOSS RESULTING FROM USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE 3D COMPUTER MODEL OR ITS CONTENT AND WAIVES ANY AND ALL CLAIMS AGAINST IDS IN ANY WAY RELATED TO THE 3D COMPUTER MODEL.


The User further agrees that the 3D Computer Model contains information that is confidential and proprietary to IDS, and that IDS retains the ownership and all other reserved rights in the work product reflected in the 3D Computer Model that was prepared by IDS or its consultants for the Project. IDS grants the User a non-exclusive, non-transferable royalty- free license to use the 3D Computer Model for information purposes only in connection with the Project [or defined other specific task] in strict accordance with these Terms of Use. The User agrees that the 3D Computer Model will be used solely and exclusively for the Project and that it will not use the 3D Computer Model and the data and/or information contained therein, in whole or in part, for any purpose or project other than the Project. The User further agrees that the 3D Computer Model will continue to be kept confidential by the User, and that it shall not be disclosed in any manner, transferred or exchanged to any third parties by the User without the expressed, written consent of IDS.
Upon completion of the User’s involvement with the Project or at any time upon written request of IDS, the User shall upon request promptly deliver to IDS the 3D Computer Model and any other material containing or reflecting any information or data in the 3D Computer Model (whether prepared by IDS, the User or otherwise) and will not retain copies, extracts or other reproductions, tangible or intangible, in whole or in part of the 3D Computer Model. The User’s non- disclosure and non-use obligations set forth herein shall survive the return, destruction or deletion of the 3D Computer Model. If the User becomes legally compelled, by subpoena or court order to disclose the 3D Model, or any information contained therein, the User shall provide IDS with prompt notice so that a protective order or other appropriate remedy may be sought by and/or compliance with the provisions of the Terms of Use may be waived.
User hereby agrees that IDS shall be entitled to equitable relief, including injunction, in the event of any breach of the Terms of Use, including without limitation its obligations to maintain the confidentiality of the 3D Model, that the granting of such relief will not be opposed and that such relief shall not be the exclusive remedy for such breach. IDS's failure to insist upon strict adherence to any term of these Terms of Use shall not be considered a waiver thereof or deprive IDS of the right subsequently to insist upon strict adherence to that term or any other term of this Terms of Use.
The User hereby agrees, to the fullest extent permitted by law, that in no event shall IDS be liable to User for any damages or losses of any kind including, but not limited to, damages by death or bodily injury to persons, injury to property, and direct, indirect, consequential, special, or incidental damages, resulting from any error, omission, inaccuracy, deficiency or defect in or problem with, the 3D Computer Model or the data and/or information contained therein. Without limiting the foregoing, the User acknowledges that the 3D Computer Model and the data and/or information contained therein may be inaccurate and/or incomplete and that IDS will have no obligation to update or modify the 3D Computer Model or any of the data and/or information contained in it because the 3D Computer Model was prepared solely for informational purposes and is not part of the Construction or Contract Documents for the Project.
The User its officers, directors, shareholders, partners, agents, employees, consultants, trade contractors, subcontractors or independent contractors shall, to the fullest extent permitted by law, defend, indemnify and hold IDS and its officers, directors, shareholders, partners, principals, consultants, agents and employees harmless from and against any and all actions, damages, demands, claims, suits, losses, liability, judgments, recoveries, costs and expenses including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney’s fees related in any way to the 3D Computer model and/or to any use of the 3D Computer Model or the data and/or the information contained therein by the User or any third party who receives the 3D Computer Model from the User. Such claims may include, but are not limited to, any claim which may arise due to deletions, omissions or variations of data due to mechanical or technical failure in connection with the transmission of the 3D Computer Model.
The User acknowledges and agrees that it is not in privity of contract with IDS as of result of these Terms of Use with respect to any claims or causes of action related to or arising out of the Project. The User further agrees to obligate any contractor, consultant or other party who uses the 3D Computer Model to be bound in writing by the terms and conditions contained herein and to provide a copy of such acceptance of the Terms of Use to IDS. Any User’s use of the 3D Computer Model and the information and/or data contained therein constitutes such User’s acceptance of all the terms here specified.
The signatory of these Terms of Use on User’s behalf warrants to IDS that he/she is duly authorized to sign these Terms of Use on User’s behalf and that these Terms of Use are a binding obligation assumed by the User.
These Terms of Use shall control and supersede all prior or simultaneous negotiations, representations and agreements, either written or oral including separate agreements between the User and IDS. Signing these Terms of Use indicates the User’s agreement to the terms stated above. However in the event that these Terms of Use are not fully executed, they shall nonetheless be effective and controlling to the parties so long as IDS has provided same to the User and it has utilized the 3D Computer Model subsequent to receiving this document without registering its written objections/modifications to these terms.


AUTHORIZED ACCEPTANCE
by Integrated Design Solutions, LLC	by Contractor




Signature	Signature



Print Name and Title	Print Name and Title



Date	Date
Document1


SECTION 01 4000 - QUALITY REQUIREMENTS

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and other Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

Section includes administrative and procedural requirements for quality assurance and quality control.

Testing and inspection services are required to verify compliance with requirements specified or indicated. These services do not relieve Contractor of responsibility for compliance with the Contract Document requirements.

Specific quality-assurance and quality-control requirements for individual work results are specified in their respective Specification Sections. Requirements in individual Sections may also cover production of standard products.
Specified tests, inspections, and related actions do not limit Contractor's other quality-assurance and quality-control procedures that facilitate compliance with the Contract Document requirements.
Requirements for Contractor to provide quality-assurance and quality-control services required by Architect, Owner, Construction Manager, or authorities having jurisdiction are not limited by provisions of this Section.

DEFINITIONS

Experienced: When used with an entity or individual, "experienced," unless otherwise further described, means having successfully completed a minimum of five previous projects similar in nature, size, and extent to this Project; being familiar with special requirements indicated; and having complied with requirements of authorities having jurisdiction.

Field Quality-Control Tests and Inspections: Tests and inspections that are performed on-site for installation of the Work and for completed Work.

Installer/Applicator/Erector: Contractor or another entity engaged by Contractor as an employee, subcontractor, or sub-subcontractor, to perform a particular construction operation, including installation, erection, application, assembly, and similar operations.

Use of trade-specific terminology in referring to a Work result does not require that certain construction activities specified apply exclusively to specific trade(s).

Mockups: Physical assemblies of portions of the Work constructed to establish the standard by which the Work will be judged. Mockups are not Samples.

Mockups are used for one or more of the following:

Verify selections made under Sample submittals.
Demonstrate aesthetic effects.
Demonstrate the qualities of products and workmanship.
Demonstrate successful installation of interfaces between components and systems.
Perform preconstruction testing to determine system performance.

Product Mockups: Mockups that may include multiple products, materials, or systems specified in a single Section.


In-Place Mockups: Mockups constructed on-site in their actual final location as part of permanent construction.

Preconstruction Testing: Tests and inspections performed specifically for Project before products and materials are incorporated into the Work, to verify performance or compliance with specified criteria. Unless otherwise indicated, copies of reports of tests or inspections performed for other than the Project do not meet this definition.

Product Tests: Tests and inspections that are performed by a nationally recognized testing laboratory (NRTL) according to 29 CFR 1910.7, by a testing agency accredited according to NIST's National Voluntary Laboratory Accreditation Program (NVLAP), or by a testing agency qualified to conduct product testing and acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction, to establish product performance and compliance with specified requirements.

Source Quality-Control Tests and Inspections: Tests and inspections that are performed at the source (e.g., plant, mill, factory, or shop).

Testing Agency: An entity engaged to perform specific tests, inspections, or both. The term "testing laboratory" has the same meaning as the term "testing agency."

Quality-Assurance Services: Activities, actions, and procedures performed before and during execution of the Work, to guard against defects and deficiencies and substantiate that proposed construction will comply with requirements.

Quality-Control Services: Tests, inspections, procedures, and related actions during and after execution of the Work, to evaluate that actual products incorporated into the Work and completed construction comply with requirements. Contractor's quality-control services do not include contract administration activities performed by Architect or Construction Manager.

DELEGATED DESIGN SERVICES

Performance and Design Criteria: Where professional design services or certifications by a design professional are specifically required of Contractor by the Contract Documents, provide products and systems complying with specific performance and design criteria indicated.

If criteria indicated are not sufficient to perform services or certification required, submit a written request for additional information to Architect.

Delegated Design Services Statement: Submit a statement signed and sealed by the responsible design professional, for each product and system specifically assigned to Contractor to be designed or certified by a design professional, indicating that the products and systems are in compliance with performance and design criteria indicated. Include list of codes, loads, and other factors used in performing these services.

CONFLICTING REQUIREMENTS

Conflicting Standards and Other Requirements: If compliance with two or more standards or requirements is specified and the standards or requirements establish different or conflicting requirements for minimum quantities or quality levels, inform the Architect regarding the conflict and obtain clarification prior to proceeding with the Work. Refer conflicting requirements that are different, but apparently equal, to Architect for clarification before proceeding.

Minimum Quantity or Quality Levels: The quantity or quality level shown or specified is the minimum provided or performed. The actual installation may comply exactly with the minimum quantity or quality specified, or it may exceed the minimum within reasonable limits. To comply with these requirements, indicated numeric values are minimum or maximum, as appropriate, for the context of requirements. Refer uncertainties to Architect for a decision before proceeding.


INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS

Qualification Data: For Contractor's quality-control personnel.

Testing Agency Qualifications: For testing agencies specified in "Quality Assurance" Article to demonstrate their capabilities and experience. Include proof of qualifications in the form of a recent report on the inspection of the testing agency by a recognized authority.

Schedule of Tests and Inspections: Prepare in tabular form and include the following:

Specification Section number and title.
Entity responsible for performing tests and inspections.
Description of test and inspection.
Identification of applicable standards.
Identification of test and inspection methods.
Number of tests and inspections required.
Time schedule or time span for tests and inspections.
Requirements for obtaining samples.
Unique characteristics of each quality-control service.

Reports: Prepare and submit certified written reports and documents as specified.

Permits, Licenses, and Certificates: For Owner's record, submit copies of permits, licenses, certifications, inspection reports, releases, jurisdictional settlements, notices, receipts for fee payments, judgments, correspondence, records, and similar documents established for compliance with standards and regulations bearing on performance of the Work.

REPORTS AND DOCUMENTS

Test and Inspection Reports: Prepare and submit certified written reports specified in other Sections. Include the following:

Date of issue.
Project title and number.
Name, address, telephone number, and email address of testing agency.
Dates and locations of samples and tests or inspections.
Names of individuals making tests and inspections.
Description of the Work and test and inspection method.
Identification of product and Specification Section.
Complete test or inspection data.
Test and inspection results and an interpretation of test results.
Record of temperature and weather conditions at time of sample-taking and testing and inspection.
Comments or professional opinion on whether tested or inspected Work complies with the Contract Document requirements.
Name and signature of laboratory inspector.
Recommendations on retesting and reinspecting.

Manufacturer's Technical Representative's Field Reports: Prepare written information documenting manufacturer's technical representative's tests and inspections specified in other Sections. Include the following:

Name, address, telephone number, and email address of technical representative making report.
Statement on condition of substrates and their acceptability for installation of product.
Statement that products at Project site comply with requirements.
Summary of installation procedures being followed, whether they comply with requirements and, if not, what corrective action was taken.
Results of operational and other tests and a statement of whether observed performance complies with requirements.


Statement of whether conditions, products, and installation will affect warranty.
Other required items indicated in individual Specification Sections.

Factory-Authorized Service Representative's Reports: Prepare written information documenting manufacturer's factory-authorized service representative's tests and inspections specified in other Sections. Include the following:

Name, address, telephone number, and email address of factory-authorized service representative making report.
Statement that equipment complies with requirements.
Results of operational and other tests and a statement of whether observed performance complies with requirements.
Statement of whether conditions, products, and installation will affect warranty.
Other required items indicated in individual Specification Sections.

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Qualifications paragraphs in this article establish the minimum qualification levels required; individual Specification Sections specify additional requirements.

Manufacturer Qualifications: A firm experienced in manufacturing products or systems similar to those indicated for this Project and with a record of successful in-service performance, as well as sufficient production capacity to produce required units. As applicable, procure products from manufacturers able to meet qualification requirements, warranty requirements, and technical or factory-authorized service representative requirements.

Fabricator Qualifications: A firm experienced in producing products similar to those indicated for this Project and with a record of successful in-service performance, as well as sufficient production capacity to produce required units.

Installer Qualifications: A firm or individual experienced in installing, erecting, applying, or assembling work similar in material, design, and extent to that indicated for this Project, whose work has resulted in construction with a record of successful in-service performance.

Professional Engineer Qualifications: A professional engineer who is legally qualified to practice in jurisdiction where Project is located and who is experienced in providing engineering services of the kind indicated. Engineering services are defined as those performed for installations of the system, assembly, or product that is similar in material, design, and extent to those indicated for this Project.

Testing and Inspecting Agency Qualifications: An NRTL, an NVLAP, or an independent agency with the experience and capability to conduct testing and inspection indicated, as documented in accordance with ASTM E329, and with additional qualifications specified in individual Sections; and, where required by authorities having jurisdiction, that is acceptable to authorities.

Manufacturer's Technical Representative Qualifications: An authorized representative of manufacturer who is trained and approved by manufacturer to observe and inspect installation of manufacturer's products that are similar in material, design, and extent to those indicated for this Project.

Factory-Authorized Service Representative Qualifications: An authorized representative of manufacturer who is trained and approved by manufacturer to inspect, demonstrate, repair, and perform service on installations of manufacturer's products that are similar in material, design, and extent to those indicated for this Project.


Preconstruction Testing: Where testing agency is indicated to perform preconstruction testing for compliance with specified requirements for performance and test methods, comply with the following Contractor's responsibilities, including the following:

Provide test specimens representative of proposed products and construction.
Submit specimens in a timely manner with sufficient time for testing and analyzing results to prevent delaying the Work.
Provide sizes and configurations of test assemblies, mockups, and laboratory mockups to adequately demonstrate capability of products to comply with performance requirements.
Build site-assembled test assemblies and mockups, using installers who will perform same tasks for Project.
When testing is complete, remove test specimens and test assemblies, and mockups; do not reuse products on Project.
Testing Agency Responsibilities: Submit a certified written report of each test, inspection, and similar quality-assurance service to Architect, through Construction Manager, with copy to Contractor. Interpret tests and inspections, and state in each report whether tested and inspected Work complies with or deviates from the Contract Documents.

Mockups: Before installing portions of the Work requiring mockups, build mockups for each form of construction and finish required to comply with the following requirements, using materials indicated for the completed Work:

Build mockups of size indicated.
Build mockups in location indicated or, if not indicated, as directed by Architect or Construction Manager.
Notify Architect and Construction Manager seven days in advance of dates and times when mockups will be constructed.
Employ supervisory personnel who will oversee mockup construction. Employ workers who will be employed to perform same tasks during the construction at Project.
Demonstrate the proposed range of aesthetic effects and workmanship.
Obtain Architect's approval of mockups before starting corresponding Work, fabrication, or construction.

Allow seven days for initial review and each re-review of each mockup.

Promptly correct unsatisfactory conditions noted by Architect's preliminary review, to the satisfaction of the Architect, before completion of final mockup.
Approval of mockups by the Architect does not constitute approval of deviations from the Contract Documents contained in mockups unless Architect specifically approves such deviations in writing.
Maintain mockups during construction in an undisturbed condition as a standard for judging the completed Work.
Demolish and remove mockups when directed unless otherwise indicated.

QUALITY CONTROL

Owner Responsibilities: Where quality-control services are indicated as Owner's responsibility, Owner will engage a qualified testing agency to perform these services.

Owner will furnish Contractor with names, addresses, and telephone numbers of testing agencies engaged and a description of types of testing and inspection they are engaged to perform.
Costs for retesting and reinspecting construction that replaces or is necessitated by Work that failed to comply with the Contract Documents will be charged to Contractor, and the Contract Sum will be adjusted by Change Order.


Contractor Responsibilities: Tests and inspections not explicitly assigned to Owner are Contractor's responsibility. Perform additional quality-control activities, whether specified or not, to verify and document that the Work complies with requirements.

Unless otherwise indicated, provide quality-control services specified and those required by authorities having jurisdiction. Perform quality-control services required of Contractor by authorities having jurisdiction, whether specified or not.
Engage a qualified testing agency to perform quality-control services.

Contractor will not employ same entity engaged by Owner, unless agreed to in writing by Owner.

Notify testing agencies at least 24 hours in advance of time when Work that requires testing or inspection will be performed.
Where quality-control services are indicated as Contractor's responsibility, submit a certified written report, in duplicate, of each quality-control service.
Testing and inspection requested by Contractor and not required by the Contract Documents are Contractor's responsibility.
Submit additional copies of each written report directly to authorities having jurisdiction, when they so direct.

Retesting/Reinspecting: Regardless of whether original tests or inspections were Contractor's responsibility, provide quality-control services, including retesting and reinspecting, for construction that replaced Work that failed to comply with the Contract Documents.

Testing Agency Responsibilities: Cooperate with Architect, Construction Manager, and Contractor in performance of duties. Provide qualified personnel to perform required tests and inspections.

Notify Architect, Construction Manager, and Contractor promptly of irregularities or deficiencies observed in the Work during performance of its services.
Determine the locations from which test samples will be taken and in which in-situ tests are conducted.
Conduct and interpret tests and inspections, and state in each report whether tested and inspected Work complies with or deviates from requirements.
Submit a certified written report, in duplicate, of each test, inspection, and similar quality-control service through Contractor.
Do not release, revoke, alter, or increase the Contract Document requirements or approve or accept any portion of the Work.
Do not perform duties of Contractor.

Manufacturer's Field Services: Where indicated, engage a factory-authorized service representative to inspect field-assembled components and equipment installation, including service connections. Report results in writing as specified in Section 01 3300 "Submittal Procedures."

Manufacturer's Technical Services: Where indicated, engage a manufacturer's technical representative to observe and inspect the Work. Manufacturer's technical representative's services include participation in preinstallation conferences, examination of substrates and conditions, verification of materials, observation of Installer activities, inspection of completed portions of the Work, and submittal of written reports.

Contractor's Associated Requirements and Services: Cooperate with agencies and representatives performing required tests, inspections, and similar quality-control services, and provide reasonable auxiliary services as requested. Notify agency sufficiently in advance of operations to permit assignment of personnel. Provide the following:

Access to the Work.
Incidental labor and facilities necessary to facilitate tests and inspections.
Adequate quantities of representative samples of materials that require testing and inspection. Assist agency in obtaining samples.


Facilities for storage and field curing of test samples.
Delivery of samples to testing agencies.
Preliminary design mix proposed for use for material mixes that require control by testing agency.
Security and protection for samples and for testing and inspection equipment at Project site.

Coordination: Coordinate sequence of activities to accommodate required quality-assurance and quality- control services with a minimum of delay and to avoid necessity of removing and replacing construction to accommodate testing and inspection.

Schedule times for tests, inspections, obtaining samples, and similar activities.

SPECIAL TESTS AND INSPECTIONS

Special Tests and Inspections: Owner will coordinate with Construction Manager to engage a qualified testing agency to conduct special tests and inspections required by authorities having jurisdiction as the responsibility of Owner, and as follows:

Verifying that manufacturer maintains detailed fabrication and quality-control procedures and reviewing the completeness and adequacy of those procedures to perform the Work.
Notifying Architect, Commissioning Authority, Construction Manager, and Contractor promptly of irregularities and deficiencies observed in the Work during performance of its services.
Submitting a certified written report of each test, inspection, and similar quality-control service to Architect and Commissioning Authority, through Construction Manager, with copy to Contractor and to authorities having jurisdiction.
Submitting a final report of special tests and inspections at Substantial Completion, which includes a list of unresolved deficiencies.
Interpreting tests and inspections, and stating in each report whether tested and inspected Work complies with or deviates from the Contract Documents.
Retesting and reinspecting corrected Work.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS (NOT USED) PART 3 - EXECUTION
TEST AND INSPECTION LOG

Test and Inspection Log: Prepare a record of tests and inspections. Include the following:

Date test or inspection was conducted.
Description of the Work tested or inspected.
Date test or inspection results were transmitted to Architect.
Identification of testing agency or special inspector conducting test or inspection.

Maintain log at Project site. Post changes and revisions as they occur. Provide access to test and inspection log for Architect's, Commissioning Authority's, Construction Manager's and authorities' having jurisdiction reference during normal working hours.

Submit log at Project closeout as part of Project Record Documents.


REPAIR AND PROTECTION

General: On completion of testing, inspection, sample-taking, and similar services, repair damaged construction and restore substrates and finishes.

Provide materials and comply with installation requirements specified in other Specification Sections or matching existing substrates and finishes. Restore patched areas and extend restoration into adjoining areas with durable seams that are as invisible as possible. Comply with the Contract Document requirements for cutting and patching in Section 01 7300 - Execution.

Protect construction exposed by or for quality-control service activities.

Repair and protection are Contractor's responsibility, regardless of the assignment of responsibility for quality-control services.


END OF SECTION 01 4000


SECTION 01 4200 - REFERENCES

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and other Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

DEFINITIONS

General: Basic Contract definitions are included in the Conditions of the Contract.

"Approved": When used to convey Architect's action on Contractor's submittals, applications, and requests, "approved" is limited to Architect's duties and responsibilities as stated in the Conditions of the Contract.

"Directed": A command or instruction by Architect. Other terms including "requested," "authorized," "selected," "required," and "permitted" have the same meaning as "directed."

"Indicated": Requirements expressed by graphic representations or in written form on Drawings, in Specifications, and in other Contract Documents. Other terms including "shown," "noted," "scheduled," and "specified" have the same meaning as "indicated."

"Regulations": Laws, ordinances, statutes, and lawful orders issued by authorities having jurisdiction, and rules, conventions, and agreements within the construction industry that control performance of the Work.

"Furnish": Supply and deliver to Project site, ready for unloading, unpacking, assembly, installation, and similar operations.

"Install": Unload, temporarily store, unpack, assemble, erect, place, anchor, apply, work to dimension, finish, cure, protect, clean, and similar operations at Project site.

"Provide": Furnish and install, complete and ready for the intended use.

"Project Site": Space available for performing construction activities. The extent of Project site is shown on Drawings and may or may not be identical with the description of the land on which Project is to be built.

INDUSTRY STANDARDS

Applicability of Standards: Unless the Contract Documents include more stringent requirements, applicable construction industry standards have the same force and effect as if bound or copied directly into the Contract Documents to the extent referenced. Such standards are made a part of the Contract Documents by reference.

Publication Dates: Comply with standards in effect as of date of the Contract Documents unless otherwise indicated.

For standards referenced by applicable building codes, comply with dates of standards as listed in building codes.

Copies of Standards: Each entity engaged in construction on Project should be familiar with industry standards applicable to its construction activity. Copies of applicable standards are not bound with the Contract Documents.

Where copies of standards are needed to perform a required construction activity, obtain copies directly from publication source.


ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

Industry Organizations: Where abbreviations and acronyms are used in Specifications or other Contract Documents, they shall mean the recognized name of the entities indicated in Gale's "Encyclopedia of Associations: National Organizations of the U.S." or in Columbia Books' "National Trade & Professional Associations of the United States."

Federal Government Agencies: Where abbreviations and acronyms are used in Specifications or other Contract Documents, they shall mean the recognized name of the entities in the following list.

EPA - Environmental Protection Agency; www.epa.gov.
OSHA - Occupational Safety & Health Administration; www.osha.gov.
USDA - Department of Agriculture; www.usda.gov.

CODES AND REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS

Regulatory requirements applicable to this project: Refer to Drawings.

Where Drawings and specification sections reference more current standards or codes, comply with the more restrictive requirements.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS (NOT USED) PART 3 - EXECUTION (NOT USED)

END OF SECTION 01 4200


SECTION 01 6000 - PRODUCT REQUIREMENTS

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and other Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

Section includes administrative and procedural requirements for selection of products for use in Project; product delivery, storage, and handling; manufacturers' standard warranties on products; special warranties; and comparable products.

DEFINITIONS

Products: Items obtained for incorporating into the Work, whether purchased for Project or taken from previously purchased stock. The term "product" includes the terms "material," "equipment," "system," and terms of similar intent.

Named Products: Items identified by manufacturer's product name, including make or model number or other designation shown or listed in manufacturer's published product literature that is current as of date of the Contract Documents.
New Products: Items that have not previously been incorporated into another project or facility. Salvaged items or items reused from other projects are not considered new products. Items that are manufactured or fabricated to include recycled content materials are considered new products, unless indicated otherwise.
Comparable Product: Product by named manufacturer that is demonstrated and approved through the comparable product submittal process described in Part 2 "Comparable Products" Article, to have the indicated qualities related to type, function, dimension, in-service performance, physical properties, appearance, and other characteristics that equal or exceed those of specified product.

Basis-of-Design Product Specification: A specification in which a single manufacturer's product is named and accompanied by the words "basis-of-design product," including make or model number or other designation. Published attributes and characteristics of basis-of-design product establish salient characteristics of products.

Evaluation of Comparable Products: In addition to the basis-of-design product description, product attributes and characteristics may be listed to establish the significant qualities related to type, function, in-service performance and physical properties, weight, dimension, durability, visual characteristics, and other special features and requirements for purposes of evaluating comparable products of additional manufacturers named in the specification.

Subject to Compliance with Requirements: Where the phrase "Subject to compliance with requirements" introduces a product selection procedure in an individual Specification Section, provide products qualified under the specified product procedure. In the event that a named product or product by a named manufacturer does not meet the other requirements of the specifications, select another named product or product from another named manufacturer that does meet the requirements of the specifications; submit a comparable product request or substitution request, if applicable.

Comparable Product Request Submittal: An action submittal requesting consideration of a comparable product, including the following information:

Identification of basis-of-design product or fabrication or installation method to be replaced, including Specification Section number and title and Drawing numbers and titles.
Data indicating compliance with the requirements specified in Part 2 "Comparable Products" Article.


Basis-of-Design Product Specification Submittal: An action submittal complying with requirements in Section 013300 "Submittal Procedures."

Substitution: Refer to Section 01 2500 - Substitution Procedures, for definition and limitations on substitutions.

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Compatibility of Options: If Contractor is given option of selecting between two or more products for use on Project, select product compatible with products previously selected, even if previously selected products were also options.

Identification of Products: Except for required labels and operating data, do not attach or imprint manufacturer or product names or trademarks on exposed surfaces of products or equipment that will be exposed to view in occupied spaces or on the exterior.

Labels: Locate required product labels and stamps on a concealed surface, or, where required for observation following installation, on a visually accessible surface that is not conspicuous.
Equipment Nameplates: Provide a permanent nameplate on each item of service- or power-operated equipment. Locate on a visually accessible but inconspicuous surface. Include information essential for operation, including the following:

Name of product and manufacturer.
Model and serial number.
Capacity.
Speed.
Ratings.

See individual identification Sections in Divisions 21, 22, 23, and 26 for additional equipment identification requirements.

COORDINATION

Modify or adjust affected work as necessary to integrate work of approved comparable products and approved substitutions.

PRODUCT DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING

Deliver, store, and handle products, using means and methods that will prevent damage, deterioration, and loss, including theft and vandalism. Comply with manufacturer's written instructions.

Delivery and Handling:

Schedule delivery to minimize long-term storage at Project site and to prevent overcrowding of construction spaces.
Coordinate delivery with installation time to ensure minimum holding time for items that are flammable, hazardous, easily damaged, or sensitive to deterioration, theft, and other losses.
Deliver products to Project site in an undamaged condition in manufacturer's original sealed container or other packaging system, complete with labels and instructions for handling, storing, unpacking, protecting, and installing.
Inspect products on delivery to determine compliance with the Contract Documents and that products are undamaged and properly protected.

Storage:

Provide a secure location and enclosure at Project site for storage of materials and equipment.
Store products to allow for inspection and measurement of quantity or counting of units.


Store materials in a manner that will not endanger Project structure.
Store products that are subject to damage by the elements under cover in a weathertight enclosure above ground, with ventilation adequate to prevent condensation and with adequate protection from wind.
Protect foam plastic from exposure to sunlight, except to extent necessary for period of installation and concealment.
Comply with product manufacturer's written instructions for temperature, humidity, ventilation, and weather-protection requirements for storage.
Protect stored products from damage and liquids from freezing.

PRODUCT WARRANTIES

Warranties specified in other Sections shall be in addition to, and run concurrent with, other warranties required by the Contract Documents. Manufacturer's disclaimers and limitations on product warranties do not relieve Contractor of obligations under requirements of the Contract Documents.

Manufacturer's Warranty: Written standard warranty form furnished by individual manufacturer for a particular product and issued in the name of the Owner or endorsed by manufacturer to Owner.
Special Warranty: Written warranty required by the Contract Documents to provide specific rights for Owner and issued in the name of the Owner or endorsed by manufacturer to Owner.

Special Warranties: Prepare a written document that contains appropriate terms and identification, ready for execution.

Manufacturer's Standard Form: Modified to include Project-specific information and properly executed.
Specified Form: When specified forms are included in the Project Manual, prepare a written document, using indicated form properly executed.
See other Sections for specific content requirements and particular requirements for submitting special warranties.

Submittal Time: Comply with requirements in Section 01 7700 - Closeout Procedures.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

PRODUCT SELECTION PROCEDURES

General Product Requirements: Provide products that comply with the Contract Documents, are undamaged and, unless otherwise indicated, are new at time of installation.

Provide products complete with accessories, trim, finish, fasteners, and other items needed for a complete installation and indicated use and effect.
Standard Products: If available, and unless custom products or nonstandard options are specified, provide standard products of types that have been produced and used successfully in similar situations on other projects.
Owner reserves the right to limit selection to products with warranties meeting requirements of the Contract Documents.
Where products are accompanied by the term "as selected," Architect will make selection.
Descriptive, performance, and reference standard requirements in the Specifications establish salient characteristics of products.
Or Equal: For products specified by name and accompanied by the term "or equal," "or approved equal," or "or approved," comply with requirements in "Comparable Products" Article to obtain approval for use of an unnamed product.

Submit additional documentation required by Architect in order to establish equivalency of proposed products. Unless otherwise indicated, evaluation of "or equal" product status is by the Architect, whose determination is final.


Product Selection Procedures:

Sole Product: Where Specifications name a single manufacturer and product, provide the named product that complies with requirements. Comparable products or substitutions for Contractor's convenience will not be considered.

Sole product may be indicated by the phrase "Subject to compliance with requirements, provide the following."

Sole Manufacturer/Source: Where Specifications name a single manufacturer or source, provide a product by the named manufacturer or source that complies with requirements. Comparable products or substitutions for Contractor's convenience will not be considered.

Sole manufacturer/source may be indicated by the phrase "Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by the following."

Limited List of Products: Where Specifications include a list of names of both manufacturers and products, provide one of the products listed that complies with requirements. Comparable products or substitutions for Contractor's convenience will not be considered unless otherwise indicated.

Limited list of products may be indicated by the phrase "Subject to compliance with requirements, provide one of the following."

Non-Limited List of Products: Where Specifications include a list of names of both available manufacturers and products, provide one of the products listed or an unnamed product that complies with requirements.

Non-limited list of products is indicated by the phrase "Subject to compliance with requirements, available products that may be incorporated in the Work include, but are not limited to, the following."
Provision of an unnamed product is not considered a substitution, if the product complies with requirements.

Limited List of Manufacturers: Where Specifications include a list of manufacturers' names, provide a product by one of the manufacturers listed that complies with requirements. Comparable products or substitutions for Contractor's convenience will not be considered unless otherwise indicated.

Limited list of manufacturers is indicated by the phrase "Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following."

Non-Limited List of Manufacturers: Where Specifications include a list of available manufacturers, provide a product by one of the manufacturers listed or a product by an unnamed manufacturer that complies with requirements.

Non-limited list of manufacturers is indicated by the phrase "Subject to compliance with requirements, available manufacturers whose products may be incorporated in the Work include, but are not limited to, the following."
Provision of products of an unnamed manufacturer is not considered a substitution, if the product complies with requirements.


Basis-of-Design Product: Where Specifications name a product, or refer to a product indicated on Drawings, and include a list of manufacturers, provide the specified or indicated product or a comparable product by one of the other named manufacturers. Drawings and Specifications may additionally indicate sizes, profiles, dimensions, and other characteristics that are based on the product named. Comply with requirements in "Comparable Products" Article for consideration of an unnamed product by one of the other named manufacturers.

For approval of products by unnamed manufacturers, comply with requirements in Section 01 2500 "Substitution Procedures" for substitutions for convenience.

Visual Matching Specification: Where Specifications require the phrase "match Architect's sample," provide a product that complies with requirements and matches Architect's sample. Architect's decision will be final on whether a proposed product matches.

Visual Selection Specification: Where Specifications include the phrase "as selected by Architect from manufacturer's full range" or a similar phrase, select a product that complies with requirements. Architect will select color, gloss, pattern, density, or texture from manufacturer's product line that includes both standard and premium items.

COMPARABLE PRODUCTS

Conditions for Consideration of Comparable Products: Architect will consider Contractor's request for comparable product when the following conditions are satisfied. If the following conditions are not satisfied, Architect may return requests without action, except to record noncompliance with the following requirements:

Evidence that proposed product does not require revisions to the Contract Documents, is consistent with the Contract Documents, will produce the indicated results, and is compatible with other portions of the Work.
Detailed comparison of significant qualities of proposed product with those of the named basis-of- design product. Significant product qualities include attributes, such as type, function, in-service performance and physical properties, weight, dimension, durability, visual characteristics, and other specific features and requirements.
Evidence that proposed product provides specified warranty.
List of similar installations for completed projects, with project names and addresses and names and addresses of architects and owners, if requested.
Samples, if requested.

Architect's Action on Comparable Products Submittal: If necessary, Architect will request additional information or documentation for evaluation, as specified in Section 01 3300 "Submittal Procedures."

Form of Approval of Submittal: As specified in Section 01 3300 "Submittal Procedures."
Use product specified if Architect does not issue a decision on use of a comparable product request within time allocated.

Submittal Requirements, Two-Step Process: Approval by the Architect of Contractor's request for use of comparable product is not intended to satisfy other submittal requirements. Comply with specified submittal requirements.

PART 3 - EXECUTION (NOT USED)


END OF SECTION 01 6000


SECTION 01 7300 - EXECUTION

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and other Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

Section includes general administrative and procedural requirements governing execution of the Work, including, but not limited to, the following:

Installation of the Work.
RFIs.
Cutting and patching.
General coordination procedures.
Coordination of Owner's portion of the Work.
Progress cleaning.
Starting and adjusting.
Protection of installed construction.

DEFINITIONS

RFI: Request for Information. Request from Construction Manager seeking information required by or clarifications of the Contract Documents.

Cutting: Removal of in-place construction necessary to permit installation or performance of subsequent work.

Patching: Fitting and repair work required to restore construction to original conditions after installation of subsequent work.

PREINSTALLATION MEETINGS

Cutting and Patching Conference: Conduct conference at Project site.

Prior to commencing work requiring cutting and patching, review extent of cutting and patching anticipated and examine procedures for ensuring satisfactory result from cutting and patching work. Inform Architect and Construction Manager of scheduled meeting. Require representatives of each entity directly concerned with cutting and patching to attend, including the following:

Contractor's superintendent.
Trade supervisor responsible for cutting operations.
Trade supervisor(s) responsible for patching of each type of substrate.
Mechanical, electrical, and utilities subcontractors' supervisors, to the extent each trade is affected by cutting and patching operations.

Review areas of potential interference and conflict. Coordinate procedures and resolve potential conflicts before proceeding.


REQUEST FOR INFORMATION (RFI)

General: Immediately on discovery of the need for additional information, clarification, or interpretation of the Contract Documents, Construction Manager shall prepare and submit an RFI in the form specified.

Architect will return without response those RFIs submitted to Architect by other entities controlled by Construction Manager.
Coordinate and submit RFIs in a prompt manner to avoid delays in work.

Content of the RFI: Include a detailed, legible description of item needing information or interpretation and the following:

Project name.
Architect's Project number.
Date.
Name of Contractor.
RFI number, numbered sequentially.
RFI subject.
Specification Section number and title and related paragraphs, as appropriate.
Drawing number and detail references, as appropriate.
Field dimensions and conditions, as appropriate.
Contractor's suggested resolution. If Contractor's suggested resolution impacts the Contract Time or the Contract Sum, Contractor shall state impact in the RFI.
Contractor's signature.
Attachments: Include sketches, descriptions, measurements, photos, Product Data, Shop Drawings, coordination drawings, and other information necessary to fully describe items needing interpretation.

Include dimensions, thicknesses, structural grid references, and details of affected materials, assemblies, and attachments on attached sketches.

RFI Forms: AIA Document G716 or similar form.

Attachments shall be electronic files in PDF format.

Architect's Action: Architect will review each RFI, determine action required, and respond. Allow seven days for Architect's response for each RFI. RFIs received by Architect after 1:00 p.m. will be considered as received the following working day.

The following RFIs will be returned without action:

Requests for approval of submittals.
Requests for approval of substitutions.
Requests for approval of Contractor's means and methods.
Requests for coordination information already indicated in the Contract Documents.
Requests for adjustments in the Contract Time or the Contract Sum.
Requests for interpretation of Architect's actions on submittals.
Incomplete RFIs or inaccurately prepared RFIs.

Architect's action may include a request for additional information, in which case Architect's time for response will date from time of receipt by Architect of additional information.
If Construction Manager believes the RFI response from Architect warrants change in the Contract Time or the Contract Sum, notify Architect in writing within 5 days of receipt of the RFI response.

RFI Log: Prepare, maintain, and submit a tabular log of RFIs organized by the RFI number. Submit log weekly unless other arrangement is agreed upon with Architect. Include the following:

Project name.


Name and address of Construction Manager.
Name and address of Architect.
RFI number, including RFIs that were returned without action or withdrawn.
RFI description.
Date the RFI was submitted.
Date Architect's response was received.
Identification of related Minor Change in the Work, Construction Change Directive, and Proposal Request, as appropriate.

On receipt of Architect's action, update the RFI log and immediately distribute the RFI response to affected parties. Review response and notify Architect within three days if Construction Manager disagrees with response.

CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS

Certified statements from existing manufacturers stating that existing warranties have not been affected by cutting and patching work performed under this Section.

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Manufacturer's	Installation	Instructions:	Obtain	and	maintain	on-site	manufacturer's	written recommendations and instructions for installation of specified products and equipment.

Cutting and Patching: Comply with requirements for and limitations on cutting and patching of construction elements.

Structural Elements: When cutting and patching structural elements, or when encountering the need for cutting and patching of elements whose structural function is not known, notify Architect of locations and details of cutting and await directions from Architect before proceeding. Shore, brace, and support structural elements during cutting and patching. Do not cut and patch structural elements in a manner that could change their load-carrying capacity or increase deflection.
Operational Elements: Do not cut and patch operating elements and related components in a manner that results in reducing their capacity to perform as intended or that results in increased maintenance or decreased operational life or safety. Operational elements include but are not limited to the following:

Primary operational systems and equipment.
Fire separation assemblies.
Air or smoke barriers.
Fire-suppression systems.
Plumbing piping systems.
Mechanical systems piping and ducts.
Control systems.
Communication systems.
Fire-detection and -alarm systems.
Conveying systems.
Electrical wiring systems.
Operating systems of special construction.

Other Construction Elements: Do not cut and patch other construction elements or components in a manner that could change their load-carrying capacity, that results in reducing their capacity to perform as intended, or that results in increased maintenance or decreased operational life or safety. Other construction elements include but are not limited to the following:

Water, moisture, or vapor barriers.
Membranes and flashings.
Exterior curtain-wall construction.
Sprayed fire-resistive material.


Equipment supports.
Piping, ductwork, vessels, and equipment.
Noise- and vibration-control elements and systems.

Visual Elements: Do not cut and patch construction in a manner that results in visual evidence of cutting and patching. Do not cut and patch exposed construction in a manner that would, in Architect's opinion, reduce the building's aesthetic qualities. Remove and replace construction that has been cut and patched in a visually unsatisfactory manner.

WARRANTY

Existing Warranties: Remove, replace, patch, and repair materials and surfaces cut or damaged during installation or cutting and patching operations, by methods and with materials so as not to void existing warranties.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

MATERIALS

Comply with requirements specified in other Sections.

For projects requiring compliance with sustainable design and construction practices and procedures, use products for patching that comply with sustainable design requirements.

In-Place Materials: Use materials for patching identical to in-place materials. For exposed surfaces, use materials that visually match in-place adjacent surfaces to the fullest extent possible.

If identical materials are unavailable or cannot be used, use materials that, when installed, will provide a match acceptable to Architect for the visual and functional performance of in-place materials. Use materials that are not considered hazardous.

Cleaning Agents: Use cleaning materials and agents recommended by manufacturer or fabricator of the surface to be cleaned. Do not use cleaning agents that are potentially hazardous to health or property or that might damage finished surfaces.

PART 3 - EXECUTION

EXAMINATION

Cutting and Patching: Examine surfaces to be cut and patched and conditions under which cutting and patching are to be performed.

Compatibility: Before patching, verify compatibility with and suitability of substrates, including compatibility with in-place finishes or primers.
Proceed with installation only after unsafe or unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected.

Existing Conditions: The existence and location of underground and other utilities and construction indicated as existing are not guaranteed. Before beginning sitework, investigate and verify the existence and location of underground utilities, mechanical and electrical systems, and other construction affecting the Work.

Before construction, verify the location and invert elevation at points of connection of sanitary sewer, storm sewer, gas service piping, and water-service piping; underground electrical services; and other utilities.
Furnish location data for work related to Project that must be performed by public utilities serving Project site.


Examination and Acceptance of Conditions: Before proceeding with each component of the Work, examine substrates, areas, and conditions, with Installer or Applicator present where indicated, for compliance with requirements for installation tolerances and other conditions affecting performance. Record observations.

Examine roughing-in for mechanical and electrical systems to verify actual locations of connections before equipment and fixture installation.
Examine walls, floors, and roofs for suitable conditions where products and systems are to be installed.
Verify compatibility with and suitability of substrates, including compatibility with existing finishes or primers.

Written Report: Where a written report listing conditions detrimental to performance of the Work is required by other Sections, include the following:

Description of the Work, including Specification Section number and paragraph, and Drawing sheet number and detail, where applicable.
List of detrimental conditions, including substrates.
List of unacceptable installation tolerances.
Recommended corrections.

Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected. Proceeding with the Work indicates acceptance of surfaces and conditions.

PREPARATION

Cutting and Patching:

Temporary Support: Provide temporary support of Work to be cut.
Protection: Protect in-place construction during cutting and patching to prevent damage. Provide protection from adverse weather conditions for portions of Project that might be exposed during cutting and patching operations.
Adjoining Areas: Avoid interference with use of adjoining areas or interruption of free passage to adjoining areas.
Existing Utility Services and Mechanical/Electrical Systems: Where existing services/systems are required to be removed, relocated, or abandoned, bypass such services/systems before cutting to minimize or prevent interruption to occupied areas.

Existing Utility Information: Furnish information to local utility and Owner that is necessary to adjust, move, or relocate existing utility structures, utility poles, lines, services, or other utility appurtenances located in or affected by construction. Coordinate with authorities having jurisdiction.

Field Measurements: Take field measurements as required to fit the Work properly. Recheck measurements before installing each product. Where portions of the Work are indicated to fit to other construction, verify dimensions of other construction by field measurements before fabrication. Coordinate fabrication schedule with construction progress to avoid delaying the Work.

Space Requirements: Verify space requirements and dimensions of items shown diagrammatically on Drawings.

Review of Contract Documents and Field Conditions: Immediately on discovery of the need for clarification of the Contract Documents, submit a request for information to Architect through Construction Manager.


CUTTING AND PATCHING

General: Employ skilled workers to perform cutting and patching. Proceed with cutting and patching at the earliest feasible time, and complete without delay.

Cut in-place construction to provide for installation of other components or performance of other construction, and subsequently patch as required to restore surfaces to their original condition.

Temporary Support: Provide temporary support of Work to be cut.

Protection: Protect in-place construction during cutting and patching to prevent damage. Provide protection from adverse weather conditions for portions of Project that might be exposed during cutting and patching operations.

Adjacent Occupied Areas: Where interference with use of adjoining areas or interruption of free passage to adjoining areas is unavoidable, coordinate cutting and patching in accordance with requirements in Section 01 1000 "Summary."

Existing Utility Services and Mechanical/Electrical Systems: Where existing services/systems are required to be removed, relocated, or abandoned, bypass such services/systems before cutting to minimize or prevent interruption to occupied areas.

Cutting: Cut in-place construction by sawing, drilling, breaking, chipping, grinding, and similar operations, including excavation, using methods least likely to damage elements retained or adjoining construction. If possible, review proposed procedures with original Installer; comply with original Installer's written recommendations.

In general, use hand or small power tools designed for sawing and grinding, not hammering and chopping. Cut holes and slots neatly to minimum size required, and with minimum disturbance of adjacent surfaces. Temporarily cover openings when not in use.
Finished Surfaces: Cut or drill from the exposed or finished side into concealed surfaces.
Concrete and Masonry: Cut using a cutting machine, such as an abrasive saw or a diamond-core drill.
Excavating and Backfilling: Comply with requirements in applicable Sections where required by cutting and patching operations.
Mechanical and Electrical Services: Cut off pipe or conduit in walls or partitions to be removed. Cap, valve, or plug and seal remaining portion of pipe or conduit to prevent entrance of moisture or other foreign matter after cutting.
Proceed with patching after construction operations requiring cutting are complete.

Patching: Patch construction by filling, repairing, refinishing, closing up, and similar operations following performance of other Work. Patch with durable seams that are as invisible as practicable, as judged by Architect. Provide materials and comply with installation requirements specified in other Sections, where applicable.

Inspection: Where feasible, test and inspect patched areas after completion to demonstrate physical integrity of installation.
Exposed Finishes: Restore exposed finishes of patched areas and extend finish restoration into retained adjoining construction in a manner that will eliminate evidence of patching and refinishing.

Clean piping, conduit, and similar features before applying paint or other finishing materials.
Restore damaged pipe covering to its original condition.


Floors and Walls: Where walls or partitions that are removed extend one finished area into another, patch and repair floor and wall surfaces in the new space. Provide an even surface of uniform finish, color, texture, and appearance. Remove in-place floor and wall coverings and replace with new materials, if necessary, to achieve uniform color and appearance.

Where patching occurs in a painted surface, prepare substrate and apply primer and intermediate paint coats appropriate for substrate over the patch, and apply final paint coat over entire unbroken surface containing the patch, corner to corner of wall and edge to edge of ceiling. Provide additional coats until patch blends with adjacent surfaces.

Ceilings: Patch, repair, or rehang in-place ceilings as necessary to provide an even-plane surface of uniform appearance.
Exterior Building Enclosure: Patch components in a manner that restores enclosure to a weathertight condition and ensures thermal and moisture integrity of building enclosure.

Cleaning: Clean areas and spaces where cutting and patching are performed. Remove paint, mortar, oils, putty, and similar materials from adjacent finished surfaces.

INSTALLATION

Locate the Work and components of the Work accurately, in correct alignment and elevation, as indicated.

Make vertical work plumb and make horizontal work level.
Where space is limited, install components to maximize space available for maintenance and ease of removal for replacement.
Conceal pipes, ducts, and wiring in finished areas unless otherwise indicated.
Maintain minimum headroom clearance of 96 inches (2440 mm) in occupied spaces and 90 inches (2300 mm) in unoccupied spaces, unless otherwise indicated on Drawings.

Comply with manufacturer's written instructions and recommendations for installing products in applications indicated.

Install products at the time and under conditions that will ensure satisfactory results as judged by Architect. Maintain conditions required for product performance until Substantial Completion.

Conduct construction operations, so no part of the Work is subjected to damaging operations or loading in excess of that expected during normal conditions of occupancy of type expected for Project.

Sequence the Work and allow adequate clearances to accommodate movement of construction items on- site and placement in permanent locations.

Tools and Equipment: Select tools or equipment that minimize production of excessive noise levels.

Templates: Obtain and distribute to the parties involved templates for Work specified to be factory prepared and field installed. Check Shop Drawings of other portions of the Work to confirm that adequate provisions are made for locating and installing products to comply with indicated requirements.

Attachment: Provide blocking and attachment plates and anchors and fasteners of adequate size and number to securely anchor each component in place, accurately located and aligned with other portions of the Work. Where size and type of attachments are not indicated, verify size and type required for load conditions with manufacturer.

Mounting Heights: Where mounting heights are not indicated, mount components at heights directed by Architect.
Allow for building movement, including thermal expansion and contraction.


Coordinate installation of anchorages. Furnish setting drawings, templates, and directions for installing anchorages, including sleeves, concrete inserts, anchor bolts, and items with integral anchors, that are to be embedded in concrete or masonry. Deliver such items to Project site in time for installation.

Joints: Make joints of uniform width. Where joint locations in exposed Work are not indicated, arrange joints for the best visual effect, as judged by Architect. Fit exposed connections together to form hairline joints.

Repair or remove and replace damaged, defective, or nonconforming Work.

Comply with Section 01 7700 "Closeout Procedures" for repairing or removing and replacing defective Work.

GENERAL COORDINATION PROCEDURES

Coordination: Coordinate construction operations included in different Sections of the Specifications to ensure efficient and orderly installation of each part of the Work. Coordinate construction operations included in different Sections that depend on each other for proper installation, connection, and operation.

Schedule construction operations in sequence required to obtain the best results, where installation of one part of the Work depends on installation of other components, before or after its own installation.
Coordinate installation of different components to ensure maximum performance and accessibility for required maintenance, service, and repair.
Make adequate provisions to accommodate items scheduled for later installation.

COORDINATION OF OWNER'S PORTION OF THE WORK

Site Access: Provide access to Project site for Owner's construction personnel and Owner's separate contractors.

Provide temporary facilities required for Owner-furnished, Contractor-installed products.
Refer to Section 01 1000 "Summary" for other requirements for Owner-furnished, Contractor- installed and Owner-furnished, Owner-installed products

Coordination: Coordinate construction and operations of the Work with work performed by Owner's construction personnel and Owner's separate contractors.

Construction Schedule: Inform Owner of Contractor's preferred construction schedule for Owner's portion of the Work. Adjust construction schedule based on a mutually agreeable timetable. Notify Owner if changes to schedule are required due to differences in actual construction progress.
Preinstallation Conferences: Include Owner's construction personnel and Owner's separate contractors at preinstallation conferences covering portions of the Work that are to receive Owner's work. Attend preinstallation conferences conducted by Owner's construction personnel if portions of the Work depend on Owner's construction.

PROGRESS CLEANING

Clean Project site and work areas daily, including common areas. Enforce requirements strictly. Dispose of materials lawfully.

Comply with requirements in NFPA 241 for removal of combustible waste materials and debris.
Do not hold waste materials more than seven days during normal weather or three days if the temperature is expected to rise above 80 deg F (27 deg C).


Containerize hazardous and unsanitary waste materials separately from other waste. Mark containers appropriately and dispose of legally, according to regulations.

Use containers intended for holding waste materials of type to be stored.

Site: Maintain Project site free of waste materials and debris.

Work Areas: Clean areas where Work is in progress to the level of cleanliness necessary for proper execution of the Work.

Remove liquid spills promptly.
Where dust would impair proper execution of the Work, broom-clean or vacuum the entire work area, as appropriate.

Installed Work: Keep installed work clean. Clean installed surfaces according to written instructions of manufacturer or fabricator of product installed, using only cleaning materials specifically recommended. If specific cleaning materials are not recommended, use cleaning materials that are not hazardous to health or property and that will not damage exposed surfaces.

Concealed Spaces: Remove debris from concealed spaces before enclosing the space.

Exposed Surfaces: Clean exposed surfaces and protect as necessary to ensure freedom from damage and deterioration at time of Substantial Completion.

Waste Disposal: Do not bury or burn waste materials on-site. Do not wash waste materials down sewers or into waterways. Comply with waste disposal requirements in Division 01.

During handling and installation, clean and protect construction in progress and adjoining materials already in place. Apply protective covering where required to ensure protection from damage or deterioration at Substantial Completion.

Clean and provide maintenance on completed construction as frequently as necessary through the remainder of the construction period. Adjust and lubricate operable components to ensure operability without damaging effects.

Limiting Exposures: Supervise construction operations to ensure that no part of the construction, completed or in progress, is subject to harmful, dangerous, damaging, or otherwise deleterious exposure during the construction period.

STARTING AND ADJUSTING

Coordinate startup and adjusting of equipment and operating components with requirements in Division 01.

Start equipment and operating components to confirm proper operation. Remove malfunctioning units, replace with new units, and retest.

Adjust equipment for proper operation. Adjust operating components for proper operation without binding.

Test each piece of equipment to verify proper operation. Test and adjust controls and safeties. Replace damaged and malfunctioning controls and equipment.

Manufacturer's Field Service: Comply with qualification requirements in Section 01 4000 "Quality Requirements."


PROTECTION AND REPAIR OF INSTALLED CONSTRUCTION

Provide final protection and maintain conditions that ensure installed Work is without damage or deterioration at time of Substantial Completion.

Repair Work previously completed and subsequently damaged during construction period. Repair to like- new condition.

Protection of Existing Items: Provide protection and ensure that existing items to remain undisturbed by construction are maintained in condition that existed at commencement of the Work.

Comply with manufacturer's written instructions for temperature and relative humidity.


END OF SECTION 01 7300


SECTION 01 7700 - CLOSEOUT PROCEDURES

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and other Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

Section includes administrative and procedural requirements for Contract closeout, including, but not limited to, the following:

Substantial Completion procedures.
Final completion procedures.
Warranties.
Final cleaning.

DEFINITIONS

List of Incomplete Items (Contractor's "punch list"): Contractor-prepared list of items to be completed or corrected, prepared for the Architect's use prior to Architect's inspection, to determine if the Work is substantially complete.

ACTION SUBMITTALS

Product Data: For each type of cleaning agent.

Contractor's List of Incomplete Items (Contractor's "punch list"): Initial submittal at Substantial Completion.

Certified List of Incomplete Items (Contractor's "punch list"): Final submittal at Final Completion.

CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS

Certificates of Release: From authorities having jurisdiction.

Certificate of Insurance: For continuing coverage.

MAINTENANCE MATERIAL SUBMITTALS

Schedule of Maintenance Material Items: For maintenance material submittal items required by other Sections.

SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION PROCEDURES

Contractor's List of Incomplete Items (Contractor's "punch list"): Prepare and submit a list of items to be completed and corrected, indicating the value of each item on the list and reasons why the Work is incomplete.


Submittals Prior to Substantial Completion: Complete the following a minimum of 10 days prior to requesting inspection for determining date of Substantial Completion. List items below that are incomplete at time of request.

Certificates of Release: Obtain and submit releases from authorities having jurisdiction, permitting Owner unrestricted use of the Work and access to services and utilities. Include occupancy permits, operating certificates, and similar releases.
Submit closeout submittals specified in other Division 01 Sections, including Project Record Documents, operation and maintenance manuals, damage or settlement surveys, property surveys, and similar final record information.
Submit closeout submittals specified in individual Sections, including specific warranties, workmanship bonds, maintenance service agreements, final certifications, and similar documents.
Submit maintenance material submittals specified in individual Sections, including tools, spare parts, extra materials, and similar items, and deliver to location designated by Architect. Label with manufacturer's name and model number.

Schedule of Maintenance Material Items: Prepare and submit schedule of maintenance material submittal items, including name and quantity of each item and name and number of related Specification Section. Obtain Owner's signature for receipt of submittals.

Submit testing, adjusting, and balancing records.
Submit changeover information related to Owner's occupancy, use, operation, and maintenance.

Procedures Prior to Substantial Completion: Complete the following a minimum of 10 days prior to requesting inspection for determining date of Substantial Completion. List items below that are incomplete at time of request.

Advise Owner of pending insurance changeover requirements.
Make final changeover of permanent locks and deliver keys to Owner. Advise Owner's personnel of changeover in security provisions.
Complete startup and testing of systems and equipment.
Perform preventive maintenance on equipment used prior to Substantial Completion.
Instruct Owner's personnel in operation, adjustment, and maintenance of products, equipment, and systems. Submit demonstration and training video recordings specified in Section 01 7900 "Demonstration and Training."
Advise Owner of changeover in utility services.
Participate with Owner in conducting inspection and walkthrough with local emergency responders.
Terminate and remove temporary facilities from Project site, along with mockups, construction tools, and similar elements.
Complete final cleaning requirements.
Touch up paint and otherwise repair and restore marred exposed finishes to eliminate visual defects.

Inspection: Submit a written request for inspection to determine Substantial Completion a minimum of 10 days prior to date the Work will be completed and ready for final inspection and tests. On receipt of request, Architect will either proceed with inspection or notify Contractor of unfulfilled requirements. Architect will prepare the Certificate of Substantial Completion after inspection or will notify Contractor of items, either on Contractor's list or additional items identified by Architect, that must be completed or corrected before certificate will be issued.

Request reinspection when the Work identified in previous inspections as incomplete is completed or corrected.
Results of completed inspection will form the basis of requirements for Final Completion.


FINAL COMPLETION PROCEDURES

Submittals Prior to Final Completion: Before requesting final inspection for determining Final Completion, complete the following:

Submit a final Application for Payment in accordance with Division 01]
Certified List of Incomplete Items: Submit certified copy of Architect's Substantial Completion inspection list of items to be completed or corrected (punch list), endorsed and dated by Architect. Certified copy of the list shall state that each item has been completed or otherwise resolved for acceptance.
Certificate of Insurance: Submit evidence of final, continuing insurance coverage complying with insurance requirements.
Submit Final Completion photographic documentation.

Inspection: Submit a written request for final inspection to determine acceptance a minimum of 10 days prior to date the Work will be completed and ready for final inspection and tests. On receipt of request, Architect and will either proceed with inspection or notify Contractor of unfulfilled requirements. Architect will prepare a final Certificate for Payment after inspection or will notify Contractor of construction that must be completed or corrected before certificate will be issued.

Request reinspection when the Work identified in previous inspections as incomplete is completed or corrected.

LIST OF INCOMPLETE ITEMS (CONTRACTOR'S "PUNCH LIST")

Organization of List: Include name and identification of each space and area affected by construction operations for incomplete items and items needing correction including, if necessary, areas disturbed by Contractor that are outside the limits of construction.

Organize list of spaces in sequential order, starting with exterior areas first and proceeding from lowest floor to highest floor, listed by room or space number.
Organize items applying to each space by major element, including categories for ceilings, individual walls, floors, equipment, and building systems.
Include the following information at the top of each page:

Project name.
Date.
Page number.

Submit list of incomplete items in one of the following formats as directed by Architect:

PDF Electronic File: Architect, through Construction Manager, will return annotated file.
Web-Based Project Software Upload: Utilize software feature for creating and updating list of incomplete items (punch list).

SUBMITTAL OF PROJECT WARRANTIES

Time of Submittal: Submit written warranties on request of Architect for designated portions of the Work where warranties are indicated to commence on dates other than date of Substantial Completion, or when delay in submittal of warranties might limit Owner's rights under warranty.

Organize warranty documents into an orderly sequence based on the table of contents of Project Manual.


Warranty Electronic File: Provide warranties and bonds in PDF format. Assemble complete warranty and bond submittal package into a single electronic PDF file with bookmarks enabling navigation to each item. Provide bookmarked table of contents at beginning of document.

Submit on digital media acceptable to Architect or by uploading to web-based project software site.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

MATERIALS

Cleaning Agents: Use cleaning materials and agents recommended by manufacturer or fabricator of the surface to be cleaned. Do not use cleaning agents that are potentially hazardous to health or property or that might damage finished surfaces.

PART 3 - EXECUTION

FINAL CLEANING

General: Perform final cleaning. Conduct cleaning and waste-removal operations to comply with local laws and ordinances and Federal and local environmental and antipollution regulations.

Cleaning: Employ experienced workers or professional cleaners for final cleaning. Clean each surface or unit to condition expected in an average commercial building cleaning and maintenance program. Comply with manufacturer's written instructions.

Complete the following cleaning operations before requesting inspection for certification of Substantial Completion for entire Project or for a designated portion of Project:

Clean Project site of rubbish, waste material, litter, and other foreign substances.
Sweep paved areas broom clean. Remove petrochemical spills, stains, and other foreign deposits.
Rake grounds that are not planted, mulched, or paved to a smooth, even-textured surface.
Remove tools, construction equipment, machinery, and surplus material from Project site.
Remove snow and ice to provide safe access to building.
Clean exposed exterior and interior hard-surfaced finishes to a dirt-free condition, free of stains, films, and similar foreign substances. Avoid disturbing natural weathering of exterior surfaces. Restore reflective surfaces to their original condition.
Remove debris and surface dust from limited-access spaces, including roofs, plenums, shafts, trenches, equipment vaults, manholes, attics, and similar spaces.
Clean flooring, removing debris, dirt, and staining; clean according to manufacturer's recommendations.
Vacuum and mop concrete.
Vacuum carpet and similar soft surfaces, removing debris and excess nap; clean according to manufacturer's recommendations if visible soil or stains remain.
Clean transparent materials, including mirrors and glass in doors and windows. Remove glazing compounds and other noticeable, vision-obscuring materials. Polish mirrors and glass, taking care not to scratch surfaces.
Remove labels that are not permanent.
Wipe surfaces of mechanical and electrical equipment, elevator equipment, and similar equipment. Remove excess lubrication, paint and mortar droppings, and other foreign substances.
Clean plumbing fixtures to a sanitary condition, free of stains, including stains resulting from water exposure.
Replace disposable air filters and clean permanent air filters. Clean exposed surfaces of diffusers, registers, and grills.
Clean ducts, blowers, and coils if units were operated without filters during construction or that display contamination with particulate matter on inspection.
Clean luminaires, lamps, globes, and reflectors to function with full efficiency.


Clean strainers.
Leave Project clean and ready for occupancy.

Construction Waste Disposal: Comply with waste-disposal requirements in Division 01.

REPAIR OF THE WORK

Complete repair and restoration operations required by Section 01 7300 "Execution" before requesting inspection for determination of Substantial Completion.


END OF SECTION 01 7700


SECTION 01 7823 - OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE DATA

PART 1 - GENERAL

1.1

RELATED DOCUMENTS

A.
Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and other Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.
1.2

SUMMARY

A.
Section includes administrative and procedural requirements for preparing operation and maintenance manuals, including the following:


Operation and maintenance documentation directory manuals.
Emergency manuals.
Systems and equipment operation manuals.
Systems and equipment maintenance manuals.
Product maintenance manuals.
1.3

DEFINITIONS

A.
System: An organized collection of parts, equipment, or subsystems united by regular interaction.

B.
Subsystem: A portion of a system with characteristics similar to a system.
1.4

CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS

A.
Submit operation and maintenance manuals indicated. Provide content for each manual as specified in individual Specification Sections, and as reviewed and approved at the time of Section submittals. Submit reviewed manual content formatted and organized as required by this Section.


Architect and Commissioning Authority (if any) will comment on whether content of operation and maintenance submittals is acceptable.
Where applicable, clarify and update reviewed manual content to correspond to revisions and field conditions.

B.
Format: Submit operation and maintenance manuals in the following format:


Submit on digital media acceptable to Architect or by uploading to web-based project software site
as directed by Architect. Enable reviewer comments on draft submittals.

Initial Manual Submittal: Submit draft copy of each manual at least 30 days before commencing demonstration and training. Architect and Commissioning Authority (if any) will comment on whether general scope and content of manual are acceptable.

Final Manual Submittal: Submit each manual in final form prior to requesting inspection for Substantial Completion and at least 15 days before commencing demonstration and training. Architect and Commissioning Authority (if any) will return copy with comments.

Correct or revise each manual to comply with Architect's and Commissioning Authority (if any) comments. Submit copies of each corrected manual within 15 days of receipt of Architect's and Commissioning Authority’s (if any) comments and prior to commencing demonstration and training.

Comply with Section 017700 "Closeout Procedures" for schedule for submitting operation and maintenance documentation.


FORMAT OF OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE MANUALS

Manuals, Electronic Files: Submit manuals in the form of a multiple file composite electronic PDF file for each manual type required.

Electronic Files: Use electronic files prepared by manufacturer where available. Where scanning of paper documents is required, configure scanned file for minimum readable file size.
File Names and Bookmarks: Bookmark individual documents based on file names. Name document files to correspond to system, subsystem, and equipment names used in manual directory and table of contents. Group documents for each system and subsystem into individual composite bookmarked files, then create composite manual, so that resulting bookmarks reflect the system, subsystem, and equipment names in a readily navigated file tree. Configure electronic manual to display bookmark panel on opening file.

Manuals, Paper Copy: Submit manuals in the form of hard-copy, bound and labeled volumes.

Binders: Heavy-duty, three-ring, vinyl-covered, loose-leaf binders, in thickness necessary to accommodate contents, sized to hold 8-1/2-by-11-inch (215-by-280-mm) paper; with clear plastic sleeve on spine to hold label describing contents and with pockets inside covers to hold folded oversize sheets.

If two or more binders are necessary to accommodate data of a system, organize data in each binder into groupings by subsystem and related components. Cross-reference other binders if necessary to provide essential information for proper operation or maintenance of equipment or system.
Identify each binder on front and spine, with printed title "OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE MANUAL," Project title or name, and subject matter of contents. Indicate volume number for multiple-volume sets.

Dividers: Heavy-paper dividers with plastic-covered tabs for each section of the manual. Mark each tab to indicate contents. Include typed list of products and major components of equipment included in the section on each divider, cross-referenced to Specification Section number and title of Project Manual.
Protective Plastic Sleeves: Transparent plastic sleeves designed to enclose diagnostic software storage media for computerized electronic equipment. Enclose title pages and directories in clear plastic sleeves.
Supplementary Text: Prepared on 8-1/2-by-11-inch (215-by-280-mm) white bond paper.
Drawings: Attach reinforced, punched binder tabs on drawings and bind with text.

If oversize drawings are necessary, fold drawings to same size as text pages and use as foldouts.
If drawings are too large to be used as foldouts, fold and place drawings in labeled envelopes and bind envelopes in rear of manual. At appropriate locations in manual, insert typewritten pages indicating drawing titles, descriptions of contents, and drawing locations.

REQUIREMENTS FOR EMERGENCY, OPERATION, AND MAINTENANCE MANUALS

Organization of Manuals: Unless otherwise indicated, organize each manual into a separate section for each system and subsystem, and a separate section for each piece of equipment not part of a system. Each manual shall contain the following materials, in the order listed:

Title page.
Table of contents.
Manual contents.


Title Page: Include the following information:

Subject matter included in manual.
Name and address of Project.
Name and address of Owner.
Date of submittal.
Name and contact information for Contractor.
Name and contact information for Construction Manager (if any).
Name and contact information for Architect.
Name and contact information for Commissioning Authority (if any).
Names and contact information for major consultants to the Architect that designed the systems contained in the manuals.
Cross-reference to related systems in other operation and maintenance manuals.

Table of Contents: List each product included in manual, identified by product name, indexed to the content of the volume, and cross-referenced to Specification Section number in Project Manual.

If operation or maintenance documentation requires more than one volume to accommodate data, include comprehensive table of contents for all volumes in each volume of the set.

Manual Contents: Organize into sets of manageable size. Arrange contents alphabetically by system, subsystem, and equipment. If possible, assemble instructions for subsystems, equipment, and components of one system into a single binder.

Identification: In the documentation directory and in each operation and maintenance manual, identify each system, subsystem, and piece of equipment with same designation used in the Contract Documents. If no designation exists, assign a designation according to ASHRAE Guideline 4, "Preparation of Operating and Maintenance Documentation for Building Systems."

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE DOCUMENTATION DIRECTORY MANUAL

Operation and Maintenance Documentation Directory: Prepare a separate manual that provides an organized reference to emergency, operation, and maintenance manuals. List items and their location to facilitate ready access to desired information. Include the following:

List of Systems and Subsystems: List systems alphabetically. Include references to operation and maintenance manuals that contain information about each system.
List of Equipment: List equipment for each system, organized alphabetically by system. For pieces of equipment not part of system, list alphabetically in separate list.
Tables of Contents: Include a table of contents for each emergency, operation, and maintenance manual.

EMERGENCY MANUALS

Emergency Manual: Assemble a complete set of emergency information indicating procedures for use by emergency personnel and by Owner's operating personnel for types of emergencies indicated.

Content: Organize manual into a separate section for each of the following:

Type of emergency.
Emergency instructions.
Emergency procedures.

Type of Emergency: Where applicable for each type of emergency indicated below, include instructions and procedures for each system, subsystem, piece of equipment, and component:

Fire.


Flood.
Gas leak.
Water leak.
Power failure.
Water outage.
System, subsystem, or equipment failure.
Chemical release or spill.

Emergency Instructions: Describe and explain warnings, trouble indications, error messages, and similar codes and signals. Include responsibilities of Owner's operating personnel for notification of Installer, supplier, and manufacturer to maintain warranties.

Emergency Procedures: Include the following, as applicable:

Instructions on stopping.
Shutdown instructions for each type of emergency.
Operating instructions for conditions outside normal operating limits.
Required sequences for electric or electronic systems.
Special operating instructions and procedures.

SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT OPERATION MANUALS

Systems and Equipment Operation Manual: Assemble a complete set of data indicating operation of each system, subsystem, and piece of equipment not part of a system. Include information required for daily operation and management, operating standards, and routine and special operating procedures.

Engage a factory-authorized service representative to assemble and prepare information for each system, subsystem, and piece of equipment not part of a system.
Prepare a separate manual for each system and subsystem, in the form of an instructional manual for use by Owner's operating personnel.

Content: In addition to requirements in this Section, include operation data required in individual Specification Sections and the following information:

System, subsystem, and equipment descriptions. Use designations for systems and equipment indicated on Contract Documents.
Performance and design criteria if Contractor has delegated design responsibility.
Operating standards.
Operating procedures.
Operating logs.
Wiring diagrams.
Control diagrams.
Piped system diagrams.
Precautions against improper use.
License requirements including inspection and renewal dates.

Descriptions: Include the following:

Product name and model number. Use designations for products indicated on Contract Documents.
Manufacturer's name.
Equipment identification with serial number of each component.
Equipment function.
Operating characteristics.
Limiting conditions.
Performance curves.
Engineering data and tests.
Complete nomenclature and number of replacement parts.


Operating Procedures: Include the following, as applicable:

Startup procedures.
Equipment or system break-in procedures.
Routine and normal operating instructions.
Regulation and control procedures.
Instructions on stopping.
Normal shutdown instructions.
Seasonal and weekend operating instructions.
Required sequences for electric or electronic systems.
Special operating instructions and procedures.

Systems and Equipment Controls: Describe the sequence of operation, and diagram controls as installed.

Piped Systems: Diagram piping as installed and identify color coding where required for identification.

SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT MAINTENANCE MANUALS

Systems and Equipment Maintenance Manuals: Assemble a complete set of data indicating maintenance of each system, subsystem, and piece of equipment not part of a system. Include manufacturers' maintenance documentation, preventive maintenance procedures and frequency, repair procedures, wiring and systems diagrams, lists of spare parts, and warranty information.

Engage a factory-authorized service representative to assemble and prepare information for each system, subsystem, and piece of equipment not part of a system.
Prepare a separate manual for each system and subsystem, in the form of an instructional manual for use by Owner's operating personnel.

Content: For each system, subsystem, and piece of equipment not part of a system, include source information, manufacturers' maintenance documentation, maintenance procedures, maintenance and service schedules, spare parts list and source information, maintenance service contracts, and warranties and bonds as described below.

Source Information: List each system, subsystem, and piece of equipment included in manual, identified by product name and arranged to match manual's table of contents. For each product, list name, address, and telephone number of Installer or supplier and maintenance service agent, and cross-reference Specification Section number and title in Project Manual and drawing or schedule designation or identifier where applicable.

Manufacturers' Maintenance Documentation: Include the following information for each component part or piece of equipment:

Standard maintenance instructions and bulletins; include only sheets pertinent to product or component installed. Mark each sheet to identify each product or component incorporated into the Work. If data include more than one item in a tabular format, identify each item using appropriate references from the Contract Documents. Identify data applicable to the Work and delete references to information not applicable.

Prepare supplementary text if manufacturers' standard printed data are not available and where the information is necessary for proper operation and maintenance of equipment or systems.

Drawings, diagrams, and instructions required for maintenance, including disassembly and component removal, replacement, and assembly.
Identification and nomenclature of parts and components.
List of items recommended to be stocked as spare parts.


Maintenance Procedures: Include the following information and items that detail essential maintenance procedures:

Test and inspection instructions.
Troubleshooting guide.
Precautions against improper maintenance.
Disassembly; component removal, repair, and replacement; and reassembly instructions.
Aligning, adjusting, and checking instructions.
Demonstration and training video recording, if available.

Maintenance and Service Schedules: Include service and lubrication requirements, list of required lubricants for equipment, and separate schedules for preventive and routine maintenance and service with standard time allotment.

Scheduled Maintenance and Service: Tabulate actions for daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly, semiannual, and annual frequencies.
Maintenance and Service Record: Include manufacturers' forms for recording maintenance.

Spare Parts List and Source Information: Include lists of replacement and repair parts, with parts identified and cross-referenced to manufacturers' maintenance documentation and local sources of maintenance materials and related services.

Maintenance Service Contracts: Include copies of maintenance agreements with name and telephone number of service agent.

Warranties and Bonds: Include copies of warranties and bonds and lists of circumstances and conditions that would affect validity of warranties or bonds.

Include procedures to follow and required notifications for warranty claims.

Drawings: Prepare drawings supplementing manufacturers' printed data to illustrate the relationship of component parts of equipment and systems and to illustrate control sequence and flow diagrams. Coordinate these drawings with information contained in record Drawings to ensure correct illustration of completed installation.

Do not use original project record documents as part of maintenance manuals.

PRODUCT MAINTENANCE MANUALS

Product Maintenance Manual: Assemble a complete set of maintenance data indicating care and maintenance of each product, material, and finish incorporated into the Work.

Content: Organize manual into a separate section for each product, material, and finish. Include source information, product information, maintenance procedures, repair materials and sources, and warranties and bonds, as described below.

Source Information: List each product included in manual, identified by product name and arranged to match manual's table of contents. For each product, list name, address, and telephone number of Installer or supplier and maintenance service agent, and cross-reference Specification Section number and title in Project Manual and drawing or schedule designation or identifier where applicable.

Product Information: Include the following, as applicable:

Product name and model number.
Manufacturer's name.
Color, pattern, and texture.


Material and chemical composition.
Reordering information for specially manufactured products.

Maintenance Procedures: Include manufacturer's written recommendations and the following:

Inspection procedures.
Types of cleaning agents to be used and methods of cleaning.
List of cleaning agents and methods of cleaning detrimental to product.
Schedule for routine cleaning and maintenance.
Repair instructions.

Repair Materials and Sources: Include lists of materials and local sources of materials and related services.

Warranties and Bonds: Include copies of warranties and bonds and lists of circumstances and conditions that would affect validity of warranties or bonds.

Include procedures to follow and required notifications for warranty claims.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS (NOT USED) PART 3 - EXECUTION (NOT USED)

END OF SECTION 01 7823


SECTION 01 7839 - PROJECT RECORD DOCUMENTS

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and other Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

Section includes administrative and procedural requirements for Project Record Documents, including the following:

Record Drawings.
Record specifications.
Record Product Data.
Miscellaneous record submittals.

CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS

Record Drawings: Submit annotated PDF electronic files and one paper copies of Record Drawings, including addenda and Contract modifications

Paper copies may be omitted with written approval of Architect.

Record Specifications: Submit annotated PDF electronic files and one paper copies of Project's Specifications, including addenda and Contract modifications.

Paper copies may be omitted with written approval of Architect.

Record Product Data: Submit annotated PDF electronic files and directories and one paper copies of each submittal.

Where record Product Data are required as part of operation and maintenance manuals, submit duplicate marked-up Product Data as a component of manual.

Paper copies may be omitted with written approval of Architect.

Miscellaneous Record Submittals: See other Specification Sections for miscellaneous record-keeping requirements and submittals in connection with various construction activities. Submit annotated PDF electronic files and directories and one paper copies of each submittal.

Paper copies may be omitted with written approval of Architect.


RECORD DRAWINGS

Record Prints: Maintain one set of marked-up paper copies of the Contract Drawings and Shop Drawings, incorporating new and revised drawings as modifications are issued.

Preparation: Mark record prints to show the actual installation, where installation varies from that shown originally. Require individual or entity who obtained record data, whether individual or entity is Installer, subcontractor, or similar entity, to provide information for preparation of corresponding marked-up record prints.

Give particular attention to information on concealed elements that would be difficult to identify or measure and record later.
Accurately record information in an acceptable drawing technique.
Record data as soon as possible after obtaining it.
Record and check the markup before enclosing concealed installations.
Cross-reference record prints to corresponding photographic documentation.

Content: Types of items requiring marking include, but are not limited to, the following:

Dimensional changes to Drawings.
Revisions to details shown on Drawings.
Depths of foundations.
Locations and depths of underground utilities.
Revisions to routing of piping and conduits.
Revisions to electrical circuitry.
Actual equipment locations.
Duct size and routing.
Locations of concealed internal utilities.
Changes made by Change Order or Construction Change Directive.
Changes made following Architect's written orders.
Details not on the original Contract Drawings.
Field records for variable and concealed conditions.
Record information on the Work that is shown only schematically.

Mark the Contract Drawings and Shop Drawings completely and accurately. Use personnel proficient at recording graphic information in production of marked-up record prints.
Mark record prints with erasable, red-colored pencil. Use other colors to distinguish between changes for different categories of the Work at same location.
Mark important additional information that was either shown schematically or omitted from original Drawings.
Note Construction Change Directive numbers, alternate numbers, Change Order numbers, and similar identification, where applicable.

Record Digital Data Files: Immediately before inspection for Certificate of Substantial Completion, review marked-up record prints with Architect and Construction Manager. When authorized, prepare a full set of corrected digital data files of the Contract Drawings, as follows:

Formats: Provide both of the following formats unless otherwise directed by Architect.

Same digital data software program, version, and operating system as for the original Contract Drawings.
Annotated PDF electronic file with comment function enabled.

Incorporate changes and additional information previously marked on record prints. Delete, redraw, and add details and notations where applicable.
Refer instances of uncertainty to Architect for resolution.


Architect will furnish Contractor with one set of digital data files of the Contract Drawings for use in recording information.

See Section 01 3300 "Submittal Procedures" for requirements related to use of Architect's digital data files.

Format: Identify and date each Record Drawing; include the designation "PROJECT RECORD DRAWING" in a prominent location.

Record Prints: Organize record prints into manageable sets. Bind each set with durable paper cover sheets. Include identification on cover sheets.
Record Digital Data Files: Organize digital data information into separate electronic files that correspond to each sheet of the Contract Drawings. Name each file with the sheet identification. Include identification in each digital data file.
Identification: As follows:

Project name.
Date.
Designation "PROJECT RECORD DRAWINGS."
Name of Architect and Construction Manager.
Name of Contractor.

RECORD SPECIFICATIONS

Preparation: Mark Specifications to indicate the actual product installation, where installation varies from that indicated in Specifications, addenda, and Contract modifications.

Give particular attention to information on concealed products and installations that cannot be readily identified and recorded later.
Mark copy with the proprietary name and model number of products, materials, and equipment furnished, including substitutions and product options selected.
Record the name of manufacturer, supplier, Installer, and other information necessary to provide a record of selections made.
Note related Change Orders, Record Product Data, and Record Drawings where applicable.

Format: Submit record specifications in the following two formats.

Annotated PDF electronic file or scanned PDF electronic file(s) of marked-up paper copy of Specifications
Paper copy.

RECORD PRODUCT DATA

Recording: Maintain one copy of each submittal during the construction period for Project Record Document purposes. Post changes and revisions to Project Record Documents as they occur; do not wait until end of Project.

Preparation: Mark Product Data to indicate the actual product installation where installation varies substantially from that indicated in Product Data submittal.

Give particular attention to information on concealed products and installations that cannot be readily identified and recorded later.
Include significant changes in the product delivered to Project site and changes in manufacturer's written instructions for installation.
Note related Change Orders, Record Specifications, and Record Drawings where applicable.


Format:

Submit record product data in the following two formats.

Annotated PDF electronic file or scanned PDF electronic file(s) of marked-up paper copy of Product Data
Paper copy.

Include Record Product Data directory organized by Specification Section number and title, electronically linked to each item of Record Product Data.

MISCELLANEOUS RECORD SUBMITTALS

Assemble miscellaneous records required by other Specification Sections for miscellaneous record keeping and submittal in connection with actual performance of the Work. Bind or file miscellaneous records and identify each, ready for continued use and reference.

Format:

Submit miscellaneous record submittals in the following two formats.

Annotated PDF electronic file or scanned PDF electronic file(s) of marked-up miscellaneous record submittals
Paper copy.

Include miscellaneous record submittals directory organized by Specification Section number and title, electronically linked to each item of miscellaneous record submittals.

MAINTENANCE OF RECORD DOCUMENTS

Maintenance of Record Documents: Store Record Documents in the field office apart from the Contract Documents used for construction. Do not use Project Record Documents for construction purposes. Maintain Record Documents in good order and in a clean, dry, legible condition, protected from deterioration and loss. Provide access to Project Record Documents for Architect’s reference during normal working hours.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS (NOT USED) PART 3 - EXECUTION (NOT USED)

END OF SECTION 01 7839


SECTION 01 7900 – DEMONSTRATION AND TRAINING

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and other Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

Section includes administrative and procedural requirements for instructing Owner's personnel, including the following:

Instruction in operation and maintenance of systems, subsystems, and equipment.

INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS

Instruction Program: Submit outline of instructional program for demonstration and training, including a list of training modules and a schedule of proposed dates, times, length of instruction time, and instructors' names for each training module. Include learning objective and outline for each training module.

Qualification Data: For instructor and facilitator.

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Facilitator Qualifications: A firm or individual experienced in training or educating maintenance personnel in a training program similar in content and extent to that indicated for this Project, and whose work has resulted in training or education with a record of successful learning performance.

Instructor Qualifications: A factory-authorized service representative, complying with requirements in Section 01 4000 "Quality Requirements," experienced in operation and maintenance procedures and training.

Preinstruction Conference: Conduct conference at Project site to comply with requirements in Division 01. Review methods and procedures related to demonstration and training including, but not limited to, the following:

Inspect and discuss locations and other facilities required for instruction.
Review and finalize instruction schedule and verify availability of educational materials, instructors' personnel, audiovisual equipment, and facilities needed to avoid delays.
Review required content of instruction.
For instruction that must occur outside, review weather and forecasted weather conditions and procedures to follow if conditions are unfavorable.

COORDINATION

Coordinate instruction schedule with Owner's operations. Adjust schedule as required to minimize disrupting Owner's operations and to ensure availability of Owner's personnel.

Coordinate instructors, including providing notification of dates, times, length of instruction time, and course content.

Coordinate content of training modules with content of approved emergency, operation, and maintenance manuals. Do not submit instruction program until operation and maintenance data have been reviewed and approved by Architect.


INSTRUCTION PROGRAM

Program Structure: Develop an instruction program that includes individual training modules for each system and for equipment not part of a system, as required by individual Specification Sections.

Training Modules: Develop a learning objective and teaching outline for each module. Include a description of specific skills and knowledge that participant is expected to master. For each module, include instruction for the following as applicable to the system, equipment, or component:

Basis of System Design, Operational Requirements, and Criteria: Include the following:

System, subsystem, and equipment descriptions.
Performance and design criteria if Contractor is delegated design responsibility.
Operating standards.
Regulatory requirements.
Equipment function.
Operating characteristics.
Limiting conditions.
Performance curves.

Documentation: Review the following items in detail:

Emergency manuals.
Systems and equipment operation manuals.
Systems and equipment maintenance manuals.
Product maintenance manuals.
Project Record Documents.
Identification systems.
Warranties and bonds.
Maintenance service agreements and similar continuing commitments.

Emergencies: Include the following, as applicable:

Instructions on meaning of warnings, trouble indications, and error messages.
Instructions on stopping.
Shutdown instructions for each type of emergency.
Operating instructions for conditions outside of normal operating limits.
Sequences for electric or electronic systems.
Special operating instructions and procedures.

Operations: Include the following, as applicable:

Startup procedures.
Equipment or system break-in procedures.
Routine and normal operating instructions.
Regulation and control procedures.
Control sequences.
Safety procedures.
Instructions on stopping.
Normal shutdown instructions.
Operating procedures for emergencies.
Operating procedures for system, subsystem, or equipment failure.
Seasonal and weekend operating instructions.
Required sequences for electric or electronic systems.
Special operating instructions and procedures.


Adjustments: Include the following:

Alignments.
Checking adjustments.
Noise and vibration adjustments.
Economy and efficiency adjustments.

Troubleshooting: Include the following:

Diagnostic instructions.
Test and inspection procedures.

Maintenance: Include the following:

Inspection procedures.
Types of cleaning agents to be used and methods of cleaning.
List of cleaning agents and methods of cleaning detrimental to product.
Procedures for routine cleaning.
Procedures for preventive maintenance.
Procedures for routine maintenance.
Instruction on use of special tools.

Repairs: Include the following:

Diagnosis instructions.
Repair instructions.
Disassembly; component removal, repair, and replacement; and reassembly instructions.
Instructions for identifying parts and components.
Review of spare parts needed for operation and maintenance.

PREPARATION

Assemble educational materials necessary for instruction, including documentation and training module. Assemble training modules into a training manual organized in coordination with requirements in Section 01 7823 "Operation and Maintenance Data."

Set up instructional equipment at instruction location.

INSTRUCTION

Facilitator: Engage a qualified facilitator to prepare instruction program and training modules, to coordinate instructors, and to coordinate between Contractor and Owner for number of participants, instruction times, and location.

Engage qualified instructors to instruct Owner's personnel to adjust, operate, and maintain systems, subsystems, and equipment not part of a system.

Owner, through Construction Manager, will furnish Contractor with names and positions of participants.

Scheduling: Provide instruction at mutually agreed-on times. For equipment that requires seasonal operation, provide similar instruction at start of each season.

Schedule training with Owner, through Construction Manager, with at least seven days' advance notice.


Training Location and Reference Material: Conduct training on-site in the completed and fully operational facility using the actual equipment in-place. Conduct training using final operation and maintenance data submittals.

Cleanup: Collect used and leftover educational materials and remove from Project site. Remove instructional equipment. Restore systems and equipment to condition existing before initial training use.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS (NOT USED) PART 3 - EXECUTION (NOT USED)

END OF SECTION 01 7900


SECTION 02 4119 – SELECTIVE DEMOLITION

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and other Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

Section Includes:

Demolition and removal of selected portions of building or structure.
Demolition and removal of selected site elements.
Abandonment and removal of existing utilities and utility structures.
Salvage of existing items to be reused or recycled.
Reinstalled items.

DEFINITIONS

Remove (Demolished): Detach items from existing construction and dispose of them off-site unless indicated to be salvaged or reinstalled.

Salvage: Detach items from existing construction, in a manner to prevent damage, and deliver to Owner ready for reuse.

Reinstall: Detach items from existing construction, in a manner to prevent damage, prepare for reuse, and reinstall where indicated.

Existing to Remain: Leave existing items that are not to be removed and that are not otherwise indicated to be salvaged or reinstalled.

MATERIALS OWNERSHIP

Unless otherwise indicated, demolition waste becomes property of Contractor.

PREINSTALLATION MEETINGS

Predemolition Conference: Conduct conference at Project site.

Inspect and discuss condition of construction to be selectively demolished.
Review structural load limitations of existing structure.
Review and finalize selective demolition schedule and verify availability of materials, demolition personnel, equipment, and facilities needed to make progress and avoid delays.
Review requirements of work performed by other trades that rely on substrates exposed by selective demolition operations.
Review areas where existing construction is to remain and requires protection.

INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS

Qualification Data: For demolition firm.

Qualification Data: For refrigerant recovery technician.


Proposed Protection Measures: Submit report, including Drawings, that indicates the measures proposed for protecting individuals and property, for dust control and, for noise control. Indicate proposed locations and construction of barriers.

Predemolition Photographs or Video: Show existing conditions of adjoining construction, including finish surfaces, that might be misconstrued as damage caused by demolition operations. Submit before Work begins.

Statement of Refrigerant Recovery: Signed by refrigerant recovery technician responsible for recovering refrigerant, stating that all refrigerant that was present was recovered and that recovery was performed according to EPA regulations. Include name and address of technician and date refrigerant was recovered.

Warranties: Documentation indicating that existing warranties are still in effect after completion of selective demolition.

CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS

Inventory: Submit a list of items that have been removed and salvaged.

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Demolition Firm Qualifications: Company specializing in the type of work required.

Minimum of 5 years of documented experience.

Refrigerant Recovery Technician Qualifications: Certified by an EPA-approved certification program.

FIELD CONDITIONS

Owner will occupy portions of building immediately adjacent to selective demolition area. Conduct selective demolition so Owner's operations will not be disrupted.

Conditions existing at time of inspection for bidding purpose will be maintained by Owner as far as practical.

Before selective demolition, Owner may remove items:

Notify Construction Manager of discrepancies between existing conditions and Drawings before proceeding with selective demolition.

Hazardous Materials: It is not expected that hazardous materials will be encountered in the Work.

If suspected hazardous materials are encountered, do not disturb; immediately notify Construction Manager and Owner. Hazardous materials will be removed by Owner under a separate contract.

Storage or sale of removed items or materials on-site is not permitted.

Utility Service: Maintain existing utilities indicated to remain in service and protect them against damage during selective demolition operations.

Maintain fire-protection facilities in service during selective demolition operations.


WARRANTY

Existing Warranties: Remove, replace, patch, and repair materials and surfaces cut or damaged during selective demolition, by methods and with materials and using approved contractors so as not to void existing warranties. Notify warrantor before proceeding.

Coordinate with Owner for list of existing warranties still in effect.

Notify warrantor on completion of selective demolition, and obtain documentation verifying that existing system has been inspected and warranty remains in effect. Submit documentation at Project closeout.

COORDINATION

Arrange selective demolition schedule so as not to interfere with Owner's operations.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS

Regulatory Requirements: Comply with governing EPA notification regulations before beginning selective demolition. Comply with hauling and disposal regulations of authorities having jurisdiction.

Standards: Comply with ASSE A10.6 and NFPA 241.

PART 3 - EXECUTION

EXAMINATION

Review Project Record Documents of existing construction or other existing conditions.

Perform an engineering survey of condition of building to determine whether removing any element might result in structural deficiency or unplanned collapse of any portion of structure or adjacent structures during selective building demolition operations.

Perform surveys as the Work progresses to detect hazards resulting from selective demolition activities.

Survey of Existing Conditions: Record existing conditions by use of measured drawings and preconstruction photographs or video.

Inventory and record the condition of items to be removed and salvaged. Provide photographs or video of conditions that might be misconstrued as damage caused by salvage operations.

3.2

PREPARATION

A.
Refrigerant: Before starting demolition, remove refrigerant from mechanical equipment according to 40 CFR 82 and regulations of authorities having jurisdiction.
3.3

UTILITY SERVICES AND MECHANICAL/ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS

A.
Existing Services/Systems to Remain: Maintain services/systems indicated to remain and protect them against damage.


Existing Services/Systems to Be Removed, Relocated, or Abandoned: Locate, identify, disconnect, and seal or cap off utility services and mechanical/electrical systems serving areas to be selectively demolished.

Arrange to shut off utilities with utility companies and Owner.
Refer to Divisions 20, 21, 22, 23, 26, 27, and 28 for additional requirements.
If services/systems are required to be removed, relocated, or abandoned, provide temporary services/systems that bypass area of selective demolition and that maintain continuity of services/systems to other parts of building.
Disconnect, demolish, and remove fire-suppression systems, plumbing, and HVAC systems, equipment, and components indicated on Drawings to be removed.

Piping to Be Removed: Remove portion of piping indicated to be removed and cap or plug remaining piping with same or compatible piping material.
Piping to Be Abandoned in Place: Drain piping and cap or plug piping with same or compatible piping material and leave in place.
Equipment to Be Removed: Disconnect and cap services and remove equipment.
Equipment to Be Removed and Reinstalled: Disconnect and cap services and remove, clean, and store equipment; when appropriate, reinstall, reconnect, and make equipment operational.
Equipment to Be Salvaged: Disconnect and cap services and remove equipment and deliver to Owner.
Ducts to Be Removed: Remove portion of ducts indicated to be removed and plug remaining ducts with same or compatible ductwork material.
Ducts to Be Abandoned in Place: Cap or plug ducts with same or compatible ductwork material and leave in place.

PROTECTION

Temporary Protection: Provide temporary barricades and other protection required to prevent injury to people and damage to adjacent buildings and facilities to remain.

Provide protection to ensure safe passage of people around selective demolition area and to and from occupied portions of building.
Provide temporary weather protection, during interval between selective demolition of existing construction on exterior surfaces and new construction, to prevent water leakage and damage to structure and interior areas.
Protect walls, ceilings, floors, and other existing finish work that are to remain or that are exposed during selective demolition operations.
Cover and protect furniture, furnishings, and equipment that have not been removed.
Comply with requirements for temporary enclosures, dust control, heating, and cooling specified in Division 01.

Temporary Shoring: Design, provide, and maintain shoring, bracing, and structural supports as required to preserve stability and prevent movement, settlement, or collapse of construction and finishes to remain, and to prevent unexpected or uncontrolled movement or collapse of construction being demolished.

Strengthen or add new supports when required during progress of selective demolition.

Remove temporary barricades and protections where hazards no longer exist.


SELECTIVE DEMOLITION, GENERAL

General: Demolish and remove existing construction only to the extent required by new construction and as indicated. Use methods required to complete the Work within limitations of governing regulations and as follows:

Proceed with selective demolition systematically, from higher to lower level. Complete selective demolition operations above each floor or tier before disturbing supporting members on the next lower level.
Neatly cut openings and holes plumb, square, and true to dimensions required. Use cutting methods least likely to damage construction to remain or adjoining construction. Use hand tools or small power tools designed for sawing or grinding, not hammering and chopping. Temporarily cover openings to remain.
Cut or drill from the exposed or finished side into concealed surfaces to avoid marring existing finished surfaces.
Do not use cutting torches until work area is cleared of flammable materials. At concealed spaces, such as duct and pipe interiors, verify condition and contents of hidden space before starting flame- cutting operations. Maintain portable fire-suppression devices during flame-cutting operations.
Maintain fire watch during and for at least 8 hours after flame-cutting operations.
Maintain adequate ventilation when using cutting torches.
Remove decayed, vermin-infested, or otherwise dangerous or unsuitable materials and promptly dispose of off-site.
Remove structural framing members and lower to ground by method suitable to avoid free fall and to prevent ground impact or dust generation.
Locate selective demolition equipment and remove debris and materials so as not to impose excessive loads on supporting walls, floors, or framing.
Dispose of demolished items and materials promptly. Comply with requirements of Division 01.]

Site Access and Temporary Controls: Conduct selective demolition and debris-removal operations to ensure minimum interference with roads, streets, walks, walkways, and other adjacent occupied and used facilities.

Salvaged Items:

Clean salvaged items.
Pack or crate items after cleaning. Identify contents of containers.
Store items in a secure area until delivery to Owner.
Transport items to Owner's storage area designated by Owner.
Protect items from damage during transport and storage.

Reinstalled Items:

Clean and repair items to functional condition adequate for intended reuse.
Pack or crate items after cleaning and repairing. Identify contents of containers.
Protect items from damage during transport and storage.
Reinstall items in locations indicated. Comply with installation requirements for new materials and equipment. Provide connections, supports, and miscellaneous materials necessary to make item functional for use indicated.

Existing Items to Remain: Protect construction indicated to remain against damage and soiling during selective demolition. When permitted by Architect, items may be removed to a suitable, protected storage location during selective demolition and cleaned and reinstalled in their original locations after selective demolition operations are complete.


SELECTIVE DEMOLITION PROCEDURES FOR SPECIFIC MATERIALS

Masonry: Demolish in small sections. Cut masonry at junctures with construction to remain, using power- driven saw, and then remove masonry between saw cuts.

Refer to Section 04 2000 - Unit Masonry, for salvaging masonry units.

DISPOSAL OF DEMOLISHED MATERIALS

Remove demolition waste materials from Project site and dispose of them in an EPA-approved construction and demolition waste landfill acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction.

Do not allow demolished materials to accumulate on-site.
Remove and transport debris in a manner that will prevent spillage on adjacent surfaces and areas.
Remove debris from elevated portions of building by chute, hoist, or other device that will convey debris to grade level in a controlled descent.
Comply with requirements specified in Division 01.

Burning: Do not burn demolished materials.

CLEANING

Clean adjacent structures and improvements of dust, dirt, and debris caused by selective demolition operations. Return adjacent areas to condition existing before selective demolition operations began.


END OF SECTION 02 4119


SECTION 03 0130 – CAST-IN-PLACE CONCRETE MAINTENANCE

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

Section Includes:

Cleaning of existing concrete surfaces.
Repair of exposed structural, shrinkage, and settlement cracks.
Resurfacing of concrete surfaces having spalled areas and other damage.
Repair of deteriorated concrete.

ACTION SUBMITTALS

Product Data: For each type of product.

Include construction details, material descriptions, chemical composition, physical properties, test data, and mixing, preparation, and application instructions.

INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS

Qualification Data: For installer.

Quality-Control Program: Submit a written plan for concrete maintenance to systematically demonstrate the ability of personnel to properly perform maintenance work, including each phase or process, protection of surrounding materials during operations, and control of debris and runoff during the Work. Describe in detail materials, methods, equipment, and sequence of operations to be used for each phase of the Work.

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Installer Qualifications: Company specializing in performing work of the type specified and with at least 5 years of documented experience and as follows:

Engage an experienced concrete-maintenance firm that employs installers and supervisors who are trained and approved by manufacturer.
Firm shall have completed work similar in material, design, and extent to that indicated for this Project with a record of successful in-service performance

DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING

Comply with manufacturer's written instructions for minimum and maximum temperature requirements and other conditions for storage.

Store cementitious materials off the ground, under cover, and in a dry location.

FIELD CONDITIONS

Cold-Weather Requirements for Cementitious Materials: Do not apply unless concrete-surface and air temperatures are above 40 deg F and will remain so for at least 48 hours after completion of Work.


Hot-Weather Requirements for Cementitious Materials: Protect repair work when temperature and humidity conditions produce excessive evaporation of water from patching materials. Provide artificial shade and wind breaks, and use cooled materials as required. Do not apply to substrates with temperatures of 90 deg F and above.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

CLEANING MATERIALS

Detergent: Non-ionic detergent.

CEMENTITIOUS PATCHING AND REPAIR MATERIALS

	Repair Mortar (Type A) for Horizontal (Traffic) Repairs: Latex and microsilica modified cementitious repair mortar containing a corrosion inhibitor.

Properties:

Compressive Strength (ASTM C109): 9,000 psi at 28 days, minimum.
Flexural Strength (ASTM C 348): 1000 psi at 28 days, minimum.
Freeze/Thaw Resistance (ASTM C 666, Procedure A): 300 Cycles; 92 percent relative dynamic modulus.
Application Depth: 3/8 inch to 2 inches.
Color: Gray.

Product: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide The Euclid Chemical Company; Concrete-Top Supreme: www.euclidchemical.com, or a comparable product from one of the following:

BASF, Master Builders Solutions: www.master-builders-solutions.com.
Dayton Superior Corp.: www.daytonsuperior.com.
L&M Construction Chemicals, Inc, a subsidiary of Laticrete International, Inc.: www.laticrete.com.
Sika Corp.: usa.sika.com.

	Repair Mortar (Type B) for Vertical and Overhead Repairs: Latex and microsilica modified, non-sag, cementitious repair mortar containing a corrosion inhibitor.

Properties:

Compressive Strength (ASTM C109): 5,000 psi at 28 days, minimum.
Flexural Strength (ASTM C 348): 1000 psi at 28 days, minimum.
Freeze/Thaw Resistance (ASTM C 666, Procedure A): 300 Cycles; 90 percent relative dynamic modulus.
Application Depth: 1/4 inch to 2 inch lifts.
Color: Gray.

Product: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide The Euclid Chemical Company; Verticoat Supreme: www.euclidchemical.com, or a comparable product from one of the following:

BASF, Master Builders Solutions: www.master-builders-solutions.com.
Dayton Superior Corp.: www.daytonsuperior.com.
L&M Construction Chemicals, Inc, a subsidiary of Laticrete International, Inc.: www.laticrete.com.
Sika Corp.: usa.sika.com.


Repair Mortar (Type C) for Formed Repairs - Horizontal, Vertical, or Overhead: Latex and microsilica modified cementitious repair mortar containing a corrosion inhibitor.

Properties:

Compressive Strength (ASTM C109): 10,000 psi at 28 days, minimum.
Flexural Strength (ASTM C 348): 1000 psi at 28 days, minimum.
Freeze/Thaw Resistance (ASTM C 666, Procedure A): 300 Cycles; 81 percent relative dynamic modulus.
Application Depth: 1 inch to full depth.
Color: Gray.

Product: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide The Euclid Chemical Company; Eucocrete Supreme: www.euclidchemical.com, or a comparable product from one of the following:

BASF, Master Builders Solutions: www.master-builders-solutions.com.
Dayton Superior Corp.: www.daytonsuperior.com.
L&M Construction Chemicals, Inc, a subsidiary of Laticrete International, Inc.: www.laticrete.com.
Sika Corp.: usa.sika.com.

Repair Mortar (Type D) for Minor Repairs and Patching - Horizontal or Vertical: Latex modified cementitious repair mortar.

Properties:

Compressive Strength (ASTM C109): 5,000 psi at 28 days, minimum.
Flexural Strength (ASTM C 348): 900psi at 28 days, minimum.
Freeze/Thaw Resistance (ASTM C 666, Procedure A): 300 Cycles; 91 percent relative dynamic modulus.
Application Depth: Featheredge to 1 inch.
Color: Gray.

Product: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide The Euclid Chemical Company; Tammspatch II: www.euclidchemical.com, or a comparable product from one of the following:

BASF, Master Builders Solutions: www.master-builders-solutions.com.
Dayton Superior Corp.: www.daytonsuperior.com.
L&M Construction Chemicals, Inc, a subsidiary of Laticrete International, Inc.: www.laticrete.com.
Sika Corp.: usa.sika.com.

BONDING AGENTS AND ANTI-CORROSION COATINGS

Bonding Agent (Type A) with Anti-Corrosion Coating: Multi-component, water-based epoxy and cementitious bonding agent containing a corrosion inhibitor.

Properties:

Compressive Strength (ASTM C109): 4,000 psi at 28 days, minimum.
Flexural Strength (ASTM C 348): 1000 psi at 28 days, minimum.
Bond Strength (ASTM C 882): 2000 psi at 7 days, minimum.
Shore D Hardness (ASTM D 2240): 90 to 95.
Color: Gray.


Product: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide The Euclid Chemical Company; Duralprep A.C.: www.euclidchemical.com, or a comparable product from one of the following:

BASF, Master Builders Solutions: www.master-builders-solutions.com.
Dayton Superior Corp.: www.daytonsuperior.com.
L&M Construction Chemicals, Inc, a subsidiary of Laticrete International, Inc.: www.laticrete.com.
Sika Corp.: usa.sika.com.

ACCESSORIES

Water: Potable.

	Reinforcing Steel:  ASTM A615 Grade 40 (40,000 psi) billet-steel deformed bars, epoxy coated in accordance with ASTM A775.

PART 3 - EXECUTION

EXAMINATION

Verify that surfaces are ready to receive work.

Locate areas of deteriorated or delaminated concrete using visual inspection and other methods as recommended by installer and mark boundaries.

Perform surveys as the Work progresses to detect hazards resulting from concrete-maintenance work.

PREPARATION

Provide enclosures, barricades, and other temporary construction as required to protect adjacent work from damage.

Protect persons, motor vehicles, surrounding surfaces of building being repaired, building site, plants, and surrounding buildings from harm resulting from concrete maintenance work.

Comply with each product manufacturer's written instructions for protections and precautions. Protect against adverse effects of products and procedures on people and adjacent materials, components, and vegetation.

Use only proven protection methods appropriate to each area and surface being protected.
Protect floors and other surfaces along haul routes from damage, wear, and staining.

Provide temporary barricades, barriers, and directional signage to exclude public from areas where concrete maintenance work is being performed.

Erect temporary protective covers over walkways and at points of pedestrian and vehicular entrance and exit that must remain in service during course of concrete maintenance work.

Contain dust and debris generated by concrete maintenance work and prevent it from reaching the public or adjacent surfaces.

Use water-mist sprinkling and other wet methods to control dust only with adequate, approved procedures and equipment that ensure that such water will not create a hazard or adversely affect other building areas or materials.

Neutralize and collect alkaline and acid wastes for disposal off Owner's property.


Dispose of debris and runoff from operations by legal means and in a manner that prevents soil erosion, undermining of paving and foundations, damage to landscaping, and water penetration into building interiors.

Preparation for Concrete Removal: Examine construction to be repaired to determine best methods to safely and effectively perform concrete maintenance work. Examine adjacent work to determine what protective measures will be necessary. Make explorations, probes, and inquiries as necessary to determine condition of construction to be removed in the course of repair.

Inventory and record the condition of items to be removed for reinstallation.
Provide and maintain shoring, bracing, and temporary structural supports as required to preserve stability and prevent unexpected or uncontrolled movement, settlement, or collapse of construction being demolished and construction and finishes to remain. Strengthen or add new supports when required during progress of removal work.

CLEANING EXISTING CONCRETE

Clean concrete surfaces of dirt or other contamination using the gentlest method that is effective.

Try the gentlest method first, then, if not clean enough, use a less gentle method taking care to watch for impending damage. Stop immediately if cleaning method causes additional damage.
Clean out cracks and voids using same methods.

The following are acceptable cleaning methods, in order from gentlest to less gentle:

Water washing using low-pressure, maximum of 50 psi, and, if necessary, brushes with natural or synthetic bristles.
Increasing the water washing pressure to maximum of 400 psi.

Do not use any of the following cleaning methods, unless otherwise indicated:

Brushes with wire bristles, grinding with abrasives, solvents, hydrochloric or muriatic acid, sodium hydroxide, caustic soda, or lye.
Soap or detergent that is not non-ionic.

CRACK REPAIR

Fine to Medium Cracks:

Size: Cracks that are less than 12 mils (0.012 inches) in width.

Repair Method: Remain as-is. Do not repair.

Large Cracks:

Size: Cracks that are wider than 12 mils (0.012 inches) in width.
Repair Method: Route and seal.

Remove all dirt and debris from cracks.
Remove all loose and spalling concrete from the edges of the cracks.
Route out cracks to create a 1/2 inch wide by 1/2 deep groove for sealant.
Apply a bond breaker to the bottom of the groove and fill groove with sealant; strike off sealant flush with surface of concrete or tool sealant concave.

Refer to Section 07 9200 for sealant and bond breaker installation.


DETERIORATED CONCRETE REPAIR

General: Remove and replace deteriorated concrete that has severely cracked, spalled or delaminated. Remove and replace failed concrete repair patches.

	Comply with the American Concrete Institute (ACI) Repair Guide, ACI 546R-14 and the International Concrete Repair Institute (ICRI) Repair Guideline No. 310.1R-08.

Concrete Removal: Saw cut perimeter and remove deteriorated concrete by breaking up and dislodging from steel reinforcement.

Remove concrete a minimum of 1/4 inch beyond deteriorated concrete.

Test areas where concrete has been removed by tapping with hammer and remove any additional concrete failures until only sound concrete remains.

Where half or more of the perimeter of reinforcing bar is exposed, bond between reinforcing bar and surrounding concrete is broken, or reinforcing bar is corroded, remove concrete from entire perimeter of bar and to provide at least 3/4-inch clearance around bar to completely expose steel.
Thoroughly clean removal areas of loose concrete, dust, and debris.

Concrete Patching:

Wet substrate thoroughly to attain a saturated surface dry condition (SSD) with no standing water.
Apply bonding agent and anti-corrosion coating according to the manufacturer's written instructions and as follows:

Apply Bonding Agent Type A to all existing concrete and reinforcing steel that will be patched with repair mortar.

Apply Type A Bonding Agent to reinforcing steel in two coats.

Apply repair mortar according to the manufacturer's written instructions and as follows:

	For vertical or horizontal minor repairs up to 1/2 inch deep, including surface holes, voids, and shallow spalling, use Repair Mortar Type D for minor repairs and patching.
Use Repair Mortar Type A for all horizontal (traffic) repairs greater than 1/2 inch deep.

If depth of repair exceeds 2 inches use Repair Mortar Type C for formed repairs.

Use Repair Mortar Type B for all vertical and overhead repairs greater than 1/2 deep.

	If depth of repair exceeds 2 inches use Repair Mortar Type C for formed repairs or apply Repair Mortar Type B, in lifts.
Do not to exceed the maximum lift depth as recommended by the manufacturer of the vertical repair mortar.

Use of formwork with Repair Mortar Type C shall comply with ACI 301.
Place repair mortar by troweling toward edges of patch to promote a solid bonding at the perimeter of the patch.
	For large patches fill the edges first and then work towards the center, always troweling towards the edges of the patch.
Repair mortar shall be flush with surface of adjacent existing concrete.


Finish to match adjacent existing concrete surfaces.
Wet cure repair mortar for not less than seven days by water-fog spray or water-saturated absorptive cover.


END OF SECTION 03 0130


SECTION 03 3000 - CAST-IN-PLACE CONCRETE

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

Section Includes:

Cast-in-place concrete, including concrete materials, mixture design, and finishes.
Steel reinforcement bars and welded-wire reinforcement.
Concrete formwork.

DEFINITIONS

Cementitious Materials: Portland cement alone or in combination with one or more of the following: blended hydraulic cement, fly ash, slag cement, other pozzolans, and silica fume; materials subject to compliance with requirements.

Water/Cement Ratio (w/cm): The ratio by weight of water to cementitious materials.

Form-Facing Material: Temporary structure or mold for the support of concrete while the concrete is setting and gaining sufficient strength to be self-supporting.

Formwork: The total system of support of freshly placed concrete, including the mold or sheathing that contacts the concrete, as well as supporting members, hardware, and necessary bracing.

PREINSTALLATION MEETINGS

Preinstallation Conference: Conduct conference at Project site.

Require representatives of each entity directly concerned with cast-in-place concrete to attend, including the following:

Contractor's superintendent.
Independent testing agency responsible for concrete design mixtures.
Ready-mix concrete manufacturer.
Concrete Subcontractor.

Review the following:

Steel-reinforcement installation
Anchor rod and anchorage device installation tolerances.
Forms and form-removal limitations.
Construction joints, control joints, isolation joints, and joint-filler strips.
Concrete finishes and finishing.
Floor and slab flatness and levelness measurements.
Cold and hot weather concreting procedures.
Curing procedures.
Concrete repair procedures.
Concrete protection.
Special inspection and testing and inspecting agency procedures for field quality control.


ACTION SUBMITTALS

Product Data: For each type of product and material.

Design Mixtures: For each concrete mixture.

Include indication where each mix design will be used.
Submit alternate design mixtures when characteristics of materials, Project conditions, weather, test results, or other circumstances warrant adjustments.

Shop Drawings:

Construction Joint Layout:

Indicate proposed construction joints required to construct the structure.

Location of construction joints is subject to approval of the Architect.

Concrete Reinforcement:

Include placing drawings that detail fabrication, bending, and placement.
Include bar sizes, lengths, materials, grades, bar schedules, stirrup spacing, bent bar diagrams, bar arrangement, location of splices, lengths of lap splices, details of mechanical splice couplers, details of welding splices, tie spacing, hoop spacing, and supports for concrete reinforcement.

INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS

Qualification Data: For the following:

Installer: Include copies of applicable ACI certificates.
Ready-mixed concrete manufacturer.
Testing and inspection agency: Include copies of applicable ACI certificates.

Welding certificates.

Reinforcement To Be Welded: Welding procedure specification in accordance with AWS D1.4/D1.4M

Material Certificates: For each of the following, signed by manufacturers:

Cementitious materials.
Admixtures.
Steel reinforcement and accessories
Form materials and form-release agents.
Bonding agents.
Joint-filler strips.

Material Test Reports: For the following, from a qualified testing agency:

Portland cement.
Fly ash.
Aggregates.
Admixtures:
Steel Reinforcement:


QUALITY ASSURANCE

Ready-Mixed Concrete Manufacturer Qualifications: A firm experienced in manufacturing ready-mixed concrete products and that complies with ASTM C94 requirements for production facilities and equipment; with not less than 5 years of documented experience.

Manufacturer certified in accordance with NRMCA's "Certification of Ready Mixed Concrete Production Facilities."

Installer Qualifications: A qualified installer who employs Project personnel qualified as an ACI-certified Flatwork Technician and Finisher and a supervisor who is a certified ACI Flatwork Concrete Finisher/Technician or an ACI Concrete Flatwork Technician.

Supervisors shall have not less than 5 years of documented experience

Laboratory Testing Agency Qualifications: A testing agency qualified in accordance with ASTM C1077 and ASTM E329 for testing indicated and employing an ACI-certified Concrete Quality Control Technical Manager.

Personnel performing laboratory tests shall be an ACI-certified Concrete Strength Testing Technician and Concrete Laboratory Testing Technician, Grade I. Testing agency laboratory supervisor shall be an ACI-certified Concrete Laboratory Testing Technician, Grade II.

Field Quality Control Testing Agency Qualifications: An independent agency, acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction, qualified in accordance with ASTM C1077 and ASTM E329 for testing indicated.

Personnel conducting field tests shall be qualified as an ACI Concrete Field Testing Technician, Grade 1, in accordance with ACI CPP 610.1 or an equivalent certification program.

Welding Qualifications: Qualify procedures and personnel in accordance with AWS D1.4/D 1.4M.

DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING

Comply with ASTM C94 and ACI 301.

Steel Reinforcement: Deliver, store, and handle steel reinforcement to prevent bending and damage.

Store reinforcement to avoid contact with earth.

FIELD CONDITIONS

Cold-Weather Placement: Comply with ACI 301 and ACI 306.1 and as follows.

Protect concrete work from physical damage or reduced strength that could be caused by frost, freezing actions, or low temperatures.
When average high and low temperature is expected to fall below 40 deg F for three successive days, maintain delivered concrete mixture temperature within the temperature range required by ACI 301.
Do not use frozen materials or materials containing ice or snow.
Do not place concrete in contact with surfaces less than 35 deg F, other than reinforcing steel.
Do not use calcium chloride, salt, or other materials containing antifreeze agents or chemical accelerators unless otherwise specified and approved in mixture designs.


Hot-Weather Placement: Comply with ACI 301 and ACI 305.1, and as follows:

Maintain concrete temperature at time of discharge to not exceed 95 deg F.
Fog-spray forms, steel reinforcement, and subgrade just before placing concrete. Keep subgrade uniformly moist without standing water, soft spots, or dry areas.

COORDINATION

Coordinate installation of anchors and fasteners that are to be embedded in concrete for anchoring and supporting light poles.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS

Concrete:

Comply with ACI 301 unless modified by requirements in the Contract Documents.

Provide construction and movement joints required to construct the structure in accordance with ACI 301.

Location of construction joints is subject to approval of the Architect.

Concrete Reinforcement shall comply with ACI SP-066.

Concrete Formwork:

Design, engineer, erect, shore, brace, and maintain formwork, shores, and reshores in accordance with ACI 301, to support vertical, lateral, static, and dynamic loads, and construction loads that might be applied, until structure can support such loads, so that resulting concrete conforms to the required shapes, lines, and dimensions.

Design wood panel forms in accordance with APA's "Concrete Forming Design/Construction Guide."

FORM-FACING MATERIALS

Exposed Surface Form-Facing Material: Smooth as-cast surface form-facing material.

Provide continuous, true, and smooth concrete surfaces.
Furnish in largest practicable sizes to minimize number of joints.
Acceptable Materials: As required to comply with Surface Finish designations specified and as follows:

Plywood, metal, or other approved panel materials.

Concealed Surface Form-Facing Material: Lumber, plywood, metal, plastic, or another approved material.

Provide lumber dressed on at least two edges and one side for tight fit.

Forms for Cylindrical Columns, Pedestals, and Supports: Metal, glass-fiber-reinforced plastic, paper, or fiber tubes that produce surfaces without spiral or vertical seams not exceeding specified formwork surface class.

Provide forms with sufficient wall thickness to resist plastic concrete loads without detrimental deformation.


RELATED FORMWORK MATERIALS

Chamfer Strips: Wood, metal, PVC, or rubber strips, 3/4 by 3/4 inch, minimum.

Form-Release Agent: Commercially formulated form-release agent that does not bond with, stain, or adversely affect concrete surfaces and does not impair subsequent treatments of concrete surfaces.

Formulate form-release agent with rust inhibitor for steel form-facing materials.
Form release agent for form liners shall be acceptable to form liner manufacturer.

Form Ties: Factory-fabricated, removable or snap-off, glass-fiber-reinforced plastic or metal form ties designed to resist lateral pressure of fresh concrete on forms and to prevent spalling of concrete on removal.

Furnish units that leave no corrodible metal closer than 1 inch to the plane of exposed concrete surface.
Furnish ties that, when removed, leave holes no larger than 1 inch in diameter in concrete surface.

CONCRETE MATERIALS

Source Limitations:

Obtain all concrete mixtures from a single ready-mixed concrete manufacturer for entire Project.
Obtain each type or class of cementitious material of the same brand from the same manufacturer's plant.
Obtain aggregate from single source.
Obtain each type of admixture from single source from single manufacturer.

Cementitious Materials:

Portland Cement: ASTM C150, Type I, or ASTM C595, Type IL, gray or white.
Fly Ash: ASTM C618, Class C or F.

Normal-Weight Aggregates: ASTM C33, Class 3S coarse aggregate or better, graded. Provide aggregates from a single source.

Provide Class 4S at exterior flatwork and wet interior flatwork areas.
Maximum Coarse-Aggregate Size: 1 inch nominal, unless otherwise indicated.
Fine Aggregate: Free of materials with deleterious reactivity to alkali in cement.

ADMIXTURES

Air-Entraining Admixture: ASTM C260.

Other Chemical Admixtures: Certified by manufacturer to be compatible with other admixtures that do not contribute water-soluble chloride ions exceeding those permitted in hardened concrete. Do not use calcium chloride or admixtures containing calcium chloride.

Water-Reducing Admixture: ASTM C494, Type A.
Retarding Admixture: ASTM C494, Type B.
Water-Reducing and -Retarding Admixture: ASTM C494, Type D.
High-Range, Water-Reducing Admixture: ASTM C494, Type F.
High-Range, Water-Reducing and -Retarding Admixture: ASTM C494, Type G.
Plasticizing and Retarding Admixture: ASTM C1017, Type II

Water and Water Used to Make Ice: ASTM C94, potable


2.6

STEEL REINFORCEMENT

A.
Fabricating Reinforcement


1.	Fabricate steel reinforcement according to CRSI's "Manual of Standard Practice."

B.
Reinforcing Bars: ASTM A615, Grade 60, deformed.

C.
Steel Bar Mats: ASTM A184, fabricated from ASTM A615, Grade 60, deformed bars, assembled with clips.

D.
Plain-Steel Welded-Wire Reinforcement: ASTM A1064, plain, fabricated from as-drawn steel wire into flat sheets.
2.7

REINFORCEMENT ACCESSORIES

A.
Joint Dowel Bars: ASTM A615, Grade 60, plain-steel bars, cut true to length with ends square and free of burrs.

B.
Bar Supports: Bolsters, chairs, spacers, and other devices for spacing, supporting, and fastening reinforcing bars and welded-wire reinforcement in place.

Manufacture bar supports from steel wire, plastic, or precast concrete in accordance with CRSI's "Manual of Standard Practice," of greater compressive strength than concrete and as follows:

For concrete surfaces exposed to view, where legs of wire bar supports contact forms, use CRSI Class 1 plastic-protected steel wire, all-plastic bar supports, or CRSI Class 2 stainless steel bar supports.

Steel Tie Wire: ASTM A1064, annealed steel, not less than 0.0508 inch in diameter.

Finish: Plain.

CURING MATERIALS

Absorptive Cover: AASHTO M 182, Class 2, burlap cloth made from jute or kenaf, weighing approximately 9 oz./sq. yd. when dry.

Moisture-Retaining Cover: ASTM C171, polyethylene film burlap-polyethylene sheet.

Color:

Ambient Temperature Below 50 deg F: Black.
Ambient Temperature between 50 deg F and 85 deg F: Any color.
Ambient Temperature Above 85 deg F: White.

Water: Potable or complying with ASTM C1602/C1602M.

RELATED MATERIALS

Bonding Agents: Provide one or more of the following:

Latex Bonding Agent: ASTM C1059, Type II, nonredispersible, acrylic emulsion or styrene butadiene.


Epoxy Bonding Adhesive: ASTM C881, two-component epoxy resin, capable of humid curing and bonding to damp surfaces, of class suitable for application temperature and of grade and class to suit requirements, and as follows:

Types I and II, nonload bearing and Types IV and V, load bearing, for bonding hardened or freshly mixed concrete to hardened concrete.

Expansion- and Isolation-Joint-Filler Strips:

Size and Configuration: Unless otherwise indicated, 1/2 inch thick by height equal to slab thickness, optionally with removable top section that will form 1/2 inch deep sealant pocket after removal.
Materials: Provide products manufactured from one or more of the following:

Cellulose fiber, ASTM D1751.
PVC (Type IV), ASTM D1752.
Semi-rigid, closed-cell polypropylene foam ASTM D8139.

Products: Subject to compliance with requirements, available products that may be incorporated into the Work include, but are not limited to the following:

Oscoda Plastics, Inc; Proflex Vinyl Expansion Joints: www.oscodaplastics.com.
W. R. Meadows, Inc; Fiber Expansion Joint Filler with Snap-Cap: www.wrmeadows.com.
W. R. Meadows, Inc; Deck-O-Foam Joint Filler with pre-scored top strip: www.wrmeadows.com.

CONCRETE MIXTURES, GENERAL

Prepare design mixtures for each type and strength of concrete, proportioned on the basis of laboratory trial mixture or field test data, or both, in accordance with ACI 301.

Use a qualified testing agency for preparing and reporting proposed mixture designs, based on laboratory trial mixtures.

Cementitious Materials: Limit percentage, by weight, of cementitious materials other than portland cement in concrete as follows:

Fly Ash or Other Pozzolans: 25 percent by mass.
Total Fly Ash and Pozzolan: 25 percent by mass.

Admixtures: Use admixtures in accordance with manufacturer's written instructions.

Use water-reducing, high-range water-reducing, or plasticizing admixture in concrete, as required, for placement and workability.
Use water-reducing and -retarding admixture when required by high temperatures, low humidity, or other adverse placement conditions.
Use water-reducing admixture in pumped concrete, and concrete with a w/cm below 0.50.

CONCRETE MIXTURES

Class C: Normal-weight concrete used for exterior slabs-on-grade and equipment pads.

Exposure Class: ACI 318 F3, C2.
Minimum Compressive Strength: 4000 psi at 28 days.
Maximum w/cm: 0.40.
Limit water-soluble, chloride-ion content in hardened concrete to 0.15 percent by weight of cement.
Air Content: 6 percent, plus or minus 1.5 percent at point of delivery for concrete containing 1-inch nominal maximum aggregate size.


Class D: Normal-weight concrete used for interior slabs-on-grade and equipment pads.

Exposure Class: ACI 318 F0.
Minimum Compressive Strength: 4000 psi at 28 days.
Maximum w/cm: 0.50.
Minimum Cementitious Materials Content: 520 lb/cu. yd.
Air Content: Do not use an air-entraining admixture or allow total air content to exceed 3 percent for concrete used in trowel-finished floors.

CONCRETE MIXING

Ready-Mixed Concrete: Measure, batch, mix, and deliver concrete in accordance with ASTM C94 and ASTM C1116 and furnish batch ticket information.

PART 3 - EXECUTION

PREPARATION

Provide reasonable auxiliary services to accommodate field testing and inspections, acceptable to testing agency, including the following:

Daily access to the Work.
Incidental labor and facilities necessary to facilitate tests and inspections.
Secure space for storage, initial curing, and field curing of test samples, including source of water and continuous electrical power at Project site during site curing period for test samples.
Security and protection for test samples and for testing and inspection equipment at Project site.

INSTALLATION OF FORMWORK

Comply with ACI 301.

Construct formwork, so concrete members and structures are of size, shape, alignment, elevation, and position indicated, within tolerance limits of ACI 117 and to comply with the Surface Finish designations specified for as-cast finishes.

Limit concrete surface irregularities as follows:

For concealed concrete:

Surface Finish-1.0: ACI 117 Class D, 1 inch.

For exposed concrete, concrete surfaces to receive a rubbed finish, or concrete to be covered with a coating or covering material applied directly to concrete:

Surface Finish-3.0: ACI 117 Class A, 1/8 inch.

Construct forms tight enough to prevent loss of concrete mortar.

Minimize joints.
Exposed Concrete: Symmetrically align joints in forms.

Construct removable forms for easy removal without hammering or prying against concrete surfaces.

Provide crush or wrecking plates where stripping may damage cast-concrete surfaces.
Provide top forms for inclined surfaces steeper than 1.5 horizontal to 1 vertical.
Install keyways, reglets, recesses, and other accessories, for easy removal.


Do not use rust-stained, steel, form-facing material.

Set edge forms, bulkheads, and intermediate screed strips for slabs to achieve required elevations and slopes in finished concrete surfaces.

Provide and secure units to support screed strips
Use strike-off templates or compacting-type screeds.

Provide temporary openings for cleanouts and inspection ports where interior area of formwork is inaccessible.

Close openings with panels tightly fitted to forms and securely braced to prevent loss of concrete mortar.
Locate temporary openings in forms at inconspicuous locations.

Chamfer exterior corners and edges of permanently exposed concrete.

Clean forms and adjacent surfaces to receive concrete. Remove chips, wood, sawdust, dirt, and other debris just before placing concrete.

Retighten forms and bracing before placing concrete, as required, to prevent mortar leaks and maintain proper alignment.

Coat contact surfaces of forms with form-release agent, according to manufacturer's written instructions, before placing reinforcement.

REMOVING AND REUSING FORMS

Formwork for sides of beams, walls, columns, and similar parts of the Work that does not support weight of concrete may be removed after cumulatively curing at not less than 50 deg F for 24 hours after placing concrete. Concrete has to be hard enough to not be damaged by form-removal operations, and curing and protection operations need to be maintained.

Leave formwork for beam soffits, joists, slabs, and other structural elements that support weight of concrete in place until concrete has achieved at least 70 percent of its 28-day design compressive strength.
Remove forms only if shores have been arranged to permit removal of forms without loosening or disturbing shores.

Clean and repair surfaces of forms to be reused in the Work.

Split, frayed, delaminated, or otherwise damaged form-facing material are unacceptable for exposed surfaces.
Apply new form-release agent.

When forms are reused, clean surfaces, remove fins and laitance, and tighten to close joints.

Align and secure joints to avoid offsets.
Do not use patched forms for exposed concrete surfaces unless approved by Architect.


INSTALLATION OF EMBEDDED ITEMS

Place and secure anchorage devices and other embedded items required for adjoining work that is attached to or supported by cast-in-place concrete.

Use setting drawings, templates, diagrams, instructions, and directions furnished with items to be embedded.
Install anchor rods, accurately located, to elevations required and complying with tolerances in Section 7.5 of AISC 303.
Clean embedded items immediately prior to concrete placement.

INSTALLATION OF STEEL REINFORCEMENT

Clean reinforcement of loose rust and mill scale, earth, ice, and other foreign materials that reduce bond to concrete.

Comply with CRSI's "Manual of Standard Practice" for placing and supporting reinforcement.

Accurately position, support, and secure reinforcement against displacement.

Locate and support reinforcement with bar supports to maintain minimum concrete cover.
Do not tack weld crossing reinforcing bars.

Preserve clearance between bars of not less than 1 inch, not less than one bar diameter, or not less than 1- 1/3 times size of large aggregate, whichever is greater.

Provide concrete coverage in accordance with ACI 318.

Set wire ties with ends directed into concrete, not toward exposed concrete surfaces.

Splices: Lap splices as indicated on Drawings.

Bars indicated to be continuous, and all vertical bars shall be lapped not less than 36 bar diameters at splices, or 24 inches, whichever is greater.
Stagger splices in accordance with ACI 318.
Weld reinforcing bars in accordance with AWS D1.4/D 1.4M, where indicated on Drawings.

Install welded-wire reinforcement in longest practicable lengths.

Support welded-wire reinforcement in accordance with CRSI "Manual of Standard Practice."

For reinforcement less than W4.0 or D4.0, continuous support spacing shall not exceed 12 inches.

Lap edges and ends of adjoining sheets at least one wire spacing plus 2 inches for plain wire and 8 inches for deformed wire.
Offset laps of adjoining sheet widths to prevent continuous laps in either direction.
Lace overlaps with wire.

CONCRETE PLACEMENT

Before placing concrete, verify that installation of formwork, reinforcement, embedded items, and vapor retarder is complete and that required inspections are completed.

Do not proceed until unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected.


Immediately prior to concrete placement, inspect vapor retarder for damage and deficient installation, and repair defective areas.
Provide continuous inspection of vapor retarder during concrete placement and make necessary repairs to damaged areas as Work progresses.

Notify Architect and testing and inspection agencies 24 hours prior to commencement of concrete placement.

Do not add water to concrete during delivery, at Project site, or during placement unless approved by Architect in writing, but not to exceed the amount indicated on the concrete delivery ticket.

Do not add water to concrete after adding high-range water-reducing admixtures to mixture.

Deposit concrete continuously in one layer or in horizontal layers of such thickness that no new concrete is placed on concrete that has hardened enough to cause seams or planes of weakness.

If a section cannot be placed continuously, provide construction joints as indicated.
Deposit concrete to avoid segregation.
Deposit concrete in horizontal layers of depth not to exceed formwork design pressures and in a manner to avoid inclined construction joints.
Consolidate placed concrete with mechanical vibrating equipment in accordance with ACI 301.

Do not use vibrators to transport concrete inside forms.
Insert and withdraw vibrators vertically at uniformly spaced locations to rapidly penetrate placed layer and at least 6 inches into preceding layer.
Do not insert vibrators into lower layers of concrete that have begun to lose plasticity.
At each insertion, limit duration of vibration to time necessary to consolidate concrete, and complete embedment of reinforcement and other embedded items without causing mixture constituents to segregate.

Deposit and consolidate concrete for floors and slabs in a continuous operation, within limits of construction joints, until placement of a panel or section is complete.

Do not place concrete floors and slabs in a checkerboard sequence.
Consolidate concrete during placement operations, so concrete is thoroughly worked around reinforcement and other embedded items and into corners.
Maintain reinforcement in position on chairs during concrete placement.
Screed slab surfaces with a straightedge and strike off to correct elevations.
Level concrete, cut high areas, and fill low areas.
Slope surfaces uniformly to drains where required.
Begin initial floating using bull floats or darbies to form a uniform and open-textured surface plane, before excess bleedwater appears on the surface.
Do not further disturb slab surfaces before starting finishing operations.

FINISHING FORMED SURFACES

As-Cast Surface Finishes:

At concrete surfaces not exposed to view:

ACI 301 Surface Finish SF-1.0: As-cast concrete texture imparted by form-facing material.

Patch voids larger than 1-1/2 inches wide or 1/2 inch deep.
Remove projections larger than 1 inch.
Tie holes do not require patching.
Surface Tolerance: ACI 117 Class D.


At concrete surfaces exposed to view.

ACI 301 Surface Finish SF-3.0:

Patch voids larger than 3/4 inch wide or 1/2 inch deep.
Remove projections larger than 1/8 inch.
Patch tie holes.
Surface Tolerance: ACI 117 Class A.

Related Unformed Surfaces:

Continue final surface treatment of formed surfaces uniformly across adjacent unformed surfaces unless otherwise indicated.

TOLERANCES

Conform to ACI 117.

INSTALLATION OF CONCRETE LIGHTING POLE BASES

Filling In:

Fill in holes and openings left in concrete structures after Work of other trades is in place unless otherwise indicated.
Mix, place, and cure concrete, as specified, to blend with in-place construction.
Provide other miscellaneous concrete filling indicated or required to complete the Work.

CONCRETE CURING

Protect freshly placed concrete from premature drying and excessive cold or hot temperatures.

Comply with ACI 301 and ACI 306.1 for cold weather protection during curing.
Comply with ACI 301 and ACI 305.1 for hot-weather protection during curing.
Maintain moisture loss no more than 0.2 lb/sq. ft. x h, calculated in accordance with ACI 305.1, before and during finishing operations.

Curing Formed Surfaces:

Cure formed concrete surfaces, including underside of beams, supported slabs, and other similar surfaces.
If forms remain during curing period, moist cure after loosening forms.
If removing forms before end of curing period, continue curing for remainder of curing period.

Cure concrete according to ACI 308.1, and by one or a combination of the following methods:

Moisture Curing:

Continuous Fogging: Maintain standing water on concrete surface until final setting of concrete.
Continuous Sprinkling: Maintain concrete surface continuously wet.
Absorptive Cover: Pre-dampen absorptive material before application; apply additional water to absorptive material to maintain concrete surface continuously wet.


Moisture-Retaining-Cover Curing: Cover concrete surfaces with moisture-retaining cover for curing concrete, placed in widest practicable width, with sides and ends lapped at least 12 inches, and sealed by waterproof tape or adhesive.

Immediately repair any holes or tears during curing period, using cover material and waterproof tape.

JOINT FILLING

Refer to Section 07 9200 - Sealants.

CONCRETE SURFACE REPAIRS

Defective Concrete:

Repair and patch defective areas when approved by Architect.
Remove and replace concrete that cannot be repaired and patched to Architect's approval.

Patching Mortar: Mix dry-pack patching mortar, consisting of 1 part portland cement to 2-1/2 parts fine aggregate passing a No. 16 sieve, using only enough water for handling and placing.

Repairing Formed Surfaces: Surface defects include color and texture irregularities, cracks, spalls, air bubbles, honeycombs, rock pockets, fins and other projections on the surface, and stains and other discolorations that cannot be removed by cleaning.

Immediately after form removal, cut out honeycombs, rock pockets, and voids more than 1/2 inch in any dimension to solid concrete.

Limit cut depth to 3/4 inch.
Make edges of cuts perpendicular to concrete surface.
Clean, dampen with water, and brush-coat holes and voids with bonding agent.
Fill and compact with patching mortar before bonding agent has dried.
Fill form-tie voids with patching mortar or cone plugs secured in place with bonding agent.

Repair defects on surfaces exposed to view by blending white portland cement and standard portland cement, so that, when dry, patching mortar matches surrounding color.

Patch a test area at inconspicuous locations to verify mixture and color match before proceeding with patching.
Compact mortar in place and strike off slightly higher than surrounding surface.

Repair defects on concealed formed surfaces that will affect concrete's durability and structural performance as determined by Architect.

FIELD QUALITY CONTROL

Special Inspections: Owner will engage a special inspector to perform field tests and inspections and prepare testing and inspection reports.

Testing Agency: Engage a qualified testing and inspecting agency to perform tests and inspections and to submit reports.

Testing agency shall be responsible for providing curing container for composite samples on Site and verifying that field-cured composite samples are cured in accordance with ASTM C31.
Testing agency shall immediately report to Architect, Contractor, and concrete manufacturer any failure of Work to comply with Contract Documents.


Testing agency shall report results of tests and inspections, in writing, to Owner, Architect, Contractor, and concrete manufacturer within 48 hours of inspections and tests.

Test reports shall include reporting requirements of ASTM C31, ASTM C39, and ACI 301,

Batch Tickets: For each load delivered, submit three copies of batch delivery ticket to testing agency, indicating quantity, mix identification, admixtures, design strength, aggregate size, design air content, design slump at time of batching, and amount of water that can be added at Project site.

Inspections:

Inspect formwork for shape, location, and dimensions of the concrete member being formed.
Steel-reinforcement placement.
Steel-reinforcement welding.
Headed bolts and studs.
Verification of use of required design mixture.
Concrete placement, including conveying and depositing.
Curing procedures and maintenance of curing temperature.
Verification of concrete strength before removal of shores and forms from beams and slabs.

Concrete Tests: Testing of composite samples of fresh concrete obtained in accordance with ASTM C 172M shall be performed in accordance with the following requirements:

Testing Frequency: Obtain at least one composite sample for each 100 cu. yd. or fraction thereof of each concrete mixture placed each day
Slump: ASTM C143:

One test at point of placement for each composite sample, but not less than one test for each day's pour of each concrete mixture.
Perform additional tests when concrete consistency appears to change.

Air Content: ASTM C231 pressure method, for normal-weight concrete:

One test for each composite sample, but not less than one test for each day's pour of each concrete mixture.

Concrete Temperature: ASTM C1064:

One test hourly when air temperature is 40 deg F and below or 80 deg F and above, and one test for each composite sample.

Compression Test Specimens: ASTM C31:

Cast and laboratory cure two sets of two 6-inch by 12-inch or 4-inch by 8-inch cylinder specimens for each composite sample.
Cast, initial cure, and field cure two sets of two standard cylinder specimens for each composite sample.

Compressive-Strength Tests: ASTM C39.

Test one set of two laboratory-cured specimens at seven days and one set of two specimens at 28 days.
Test one set of two field-cured specimens at seven days and one set of two specimens at 28 days.
A compressive-strength test shall be the average compressive strength from a set of two specimens obtained from same composite sample and tested at age indicated.


When strength of field-cured cylinders is less than 85 percent of companion laboratory-cured cylinders, Contractor shall evaluate operations and provide corrective procedures for protecting and curing in-place concrete.
Strength of each concrete mixture will be satisfactory if every average of any three consecutive compressive-strength tests equals or exceeds specified compressive strength, and no compressive- strength test value falls below specified compressive strength by more than 10 percent of specified compressive strength.
Nondestructive Testing: Impact hammer, sonoscope, or other nondestructive device may be permitted by Architect but will not be used as sole basis for approval or rejection of concrete.
Additional Tests:

Testing and inspecting agency shall make additional tests of concrete when test results indicate that slump, air entrainment, compressive strengths, or other requirements have not been met, as directed by Architect.
Testing and inspecting agency may conduct tests to determine adequacy of concrete by cored cylinders complying with ASTM C42 or by other methods as directed by Architect.

Acceptance criteria for concrete strength shall be in accordance with ACI 301, section 1.6.6.3.

Additional testing and inspecting, at Contractor's expense, will be performed to determine compliance of replaced or additional work with specified requirements.
Correct deficiencies in the Work that test reports and inspections indicate do not comply with the Contract Documents.

PROTECTION

Protect concrete surfaces as follows:

Protect from petroleum stains.
Diaper hydraulic equipment used over concrete surfaces.
Prohibit vehicles from interior concrete slabs.
Prohibit use of pipe-cutting machinery over concrete surfaces.
Prohibit placement of steel items on concrete surfaces.
Prohibit use of acids or acidic detergents over concrete surfaces.
Protect liquid floor treatment from damage and wear during the remainder of construction period. Use protective methods and materials, including temporary covering, recommended in writing by liquid floor treatments installer.


END OF SECTION 03 3000


SECTION 04 2000 - UNIT MASONRY

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

Section Includes:

Concrete masonry units (CMU).
Clay face brick.
Clay face brick - salvaged.
Mortar and grout.
Steel reinforcing bars.
Masonry-joint reinforcement.
Ties and anchors.
Miscellaneous masonry accessories.

DEFINITIONS

CMU(s): Concrete masonry unit(s).

Reinforced Masonry: Masonry containing reinforcing steel in grouted cells.

TMS: The Masonry Society.

PREINSTALLATION MEETINGS

Preinstallation Conference: Conduct conference at Project site.

ACTION SUBMITTALS

Product Data: For each type of product.

Shop Drawings: For the following:

Masonry Units: Show sizes, profiles, coursing, and locations of special shapes.
Reinforcing Steel: Detail bending, lap lengths, and placement of unit masonry reinforcing bars. Comply with ACI 315. Show elevations of reinforced walls.

Samples for Verification: Submit 3 samples for each type and color of the following:

Clay face brick, in the form of straps of five or more bricks or sample boards.

INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS

Qualification Data: For manufacturers, installers.


Mix Designs: For each type of mortar and grout. Include description of type and proportions of ingredients.

Include test reports for mortar mixes required to comply with property specification. Test according to ASTM C109 for compressive strength, ASTM C1506 for water retention, and ASTM C91 for air content.
Include test reports, according to ASTM C1019, for grout mixes required to comply with compressive strength requirement.

Cold-Weather and Hot-Weather Procedures: Detailed description of methods, materials, and equipment to be used to comply with requirements.

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Manufacturer Qualifications: Company specializing in manufacturing the type of products specified in this section with minimum 5 years of documented experience.

Installer Qualifications: Company specializing in performing work of the type specified and with at least 5 years of documented experience.

DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING

Store masonry units on elevated platforms in a dry location. If units are not stored in an enclosed location, cover tops and sides of stacks with waterproof sheeting, securely tied. If units become wet, do not install until they are dry.

Store cementitious materials on elevated platforms, under cover, and in a dry location. Do not use cementitious materials that have become damp.

Store aggregates where grading and other required characteristics can be maintained and contamination avoided.

Deliver preblended, dry mortar mix in moisture-resistant containers. Store preblended, dry mortar mix in delivery containers on elevated platforms in a dry location or in covered weatherproof dispensing silos.

Store masonry accessories, including metal items, to prevent corrosion and accumulation of dirt and oil.

FIELD CONDITIONS

Protection of Masonry: During construction, cover tops of walls, projections, and sills with waterproof sheeting at end of each day's work. Cover partially completed masonry when construction is not in progress.

Extend cover a minimum of 24 inches down both sides of walls, and hold cover securely in place.
Where one wythe of multiwythe masonry walls is completed in advance of other wythes, secure cover a minimum of 24 inches down face next to unconstructed wythe, and hold cover in place.

Stain Prevention: Prevent grout, mortar, and soil from staining the face of masonry to be left exposed or painted. Immediately remove grout, mortar, and soil that come in contact with such masonry.

Protect base of walls from rain-splashed mud and from mortar splatter by spreading coverings on ground and over wall surface.
Protect sills, ledges, and projections from mortar droppings.
Protect surfaces of window and door frames, as well as similar products with painted and integral finishes, from mortar droppings.
Turn scaffold boards near the wall on edge at the end of each day to prevent rain from splashing mortar and dirt onto completed masonry.


Cold-Weather Requirements: Do not use frozen materials or materials mixed or coated with ice or frost. Do not build on frozen substrates. Remove and replace unit masonry damaged by frost or by freezing conditions. Comply with cold-weather construction requirements contained in TMS 402/602.

Cold-Weather Cleaning: Use liquid cleaning methods only when air temperature is 40 deg F and higher and will remain s until masonry has dried, but not less than seven days after completing cleaning.

Hot-Weather Requirements: Comply with hot-weather construction requirements contained in TMS 402/602.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

MANUFACTURERS

Source Limitations for Masonry Units: Obtain exposed masonry units of a uniform texture and color, or a uniform blend within the ranges accepted for these characteristics, from single source from single manufacturer for each product required.

Source Limitations for Mortar Materials: Obtain mortar ingredients of a uniform quality, including color for exposed masonry, from single manufacturer for each cementitious component and from single source or producer for each aggregate.

PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS

Masonry Standard: Comply with TMS 402/602 - Building Code Requirements and Specification for Masonry Structures, except as modified by requirements in the Contract Documents.

Reinforcing Steel: Comply with ACI 315 - Guide to Presenting Reinforcing Steel Design Details.

Fire-Resistance Ratings: Comply with requirements for fire-resistance-rated assembly designs indicated.

UNIT MASONRY, GENERAL

Defective Units: Referenced masonry unit standards may allow a certain percentage of units to contain chips, cracks, or other defects exceeding limits stated. Do not use units where such defects are exposed in the completed Work and will be within 20 ft. vertically and horizontally of a walking surface.

CONCRETE MASONRY UNITS

Shapes: Provide shapes indicated and as follows, with exposed surfaces matching exposed faces of adjacent units unless otherwise indicated.

Provide special shapes for lintels, corners, jambs, sashes, movement joints, headers, bonding, and other special conditions.
Provide bullnose units for outside corners unless otherwise indicated.

Field-ground radiused corners are not permitted.

Integral Water Repellent Admixture:

Integral Water Repellent Admixture: Liquid polymeric, integral water-repellent admixture that does not reduce flexural bond strength. Units made with integral water repellent, when tested according to ASTM E514 as a wall assembly made with mortar containing integral water-repellent manufacturer's mortar additive, with test period extended to 24 hours, shall show no visible water or leaks on the back of test specimen.


Locations: Provide units made with integral water repellent admixture at exposed exterior locations and where indicated.
Limitations:

Use only in combination with mortar containing integral water repellent admixture.
Source Limitations: Use water repellent admixtures for masonry units and mortar from a single manufacturer.

Products: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide one of the following:

BASF Corp.; MasterPel 240: www.master-builders-solutions.basf.us.
Euclid Chemical Company (The); an RPM company; Eucon Blocktite Admixture: www.euclidchemical.com.
GCP Applied Technologies Inc.; Dry-Block Block Admixture: www.gcpat.com.

CMUs: ASTM C90.

Unit Compressive Strength: Provide units with minimum average net-area compressive strength of 2800 psi.
Density Classification: Normal weight.
Sizes (Widths): As indicated on Drawings, manufactured to dimensions 3/8 inch less than nominal dimensions.
Manufacturer: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products from one of the following:

Best Block Company: www.bestblock.net.
Consumers Concrete Corp.: www.consumersconcrete.com.
Echelon by Oldcastle: www.echelonmasonry.com.
Fendt Builder’s Supply, Inc.: www.fendtproducts.com.
Grand Blanc Cement Products: www.grandblanccementproducts.com.
Michigan Certified Concrete: www.micertconcrete.com.
National Block Company: www.nationalblock.com.

CONCRETE AND MASONRY LINTELS

Masonry Lintels:

General: Prefabricated or built-in-place masonry lintels made from bond beam CMUs matching adjacent CMUs in color, texture, and density classification, with reinforcing bars placed as indicated and filled with coarse grout. Cure prefabricated lintels before handling and installing. Temporarily support built-in-place lintels until cured.
Refer to Drawings for lintel sizing, reinforcing, and other requirements. Where not otherwise indicated on Drawings, fabricate lintels with reinforcing bars in accordance with the following table:

LINTEL SECTION (WxH)
CLEAR SPAN
Up to 3’-4”
3-4”+
to 4’-8”
4’-8”+
to 5’-4”
5’-4”+ to 6’
6’+ to
6’-8”
6’-8”+ to
7’-4”
7’-4”+ to
8’-8”
4”x8”
1-#4
1-#4
1-#5
Not Permitted
Not Permitted
Not Permitted
Not Permitted
6”x8”
1-#4
1-#4
2-#4
2-#5
Not Permitted
Not Permitted
Not Permitted
8”x8”
1-#4
2-#4
2-#5
2-#5
2-#5
2-#6
2-#5(T) +
2-#6 (B)
10”x8”
2-#4
2-#4
2-#5
2-#5
2-#5
2-#5(T) +
2-#6 (B)
2-#5(T) +
2-#6 (B)
12”x8”
2-#4
2-#5
2-#5
2-#5
2-#6
2-#5(T) +
2-#6 (B)
2-#5(T) +
2-#6 (B)

Unless otherwise indicated, place reinforcing bars 1 inch from bottom web.


(B) = Bottom.
(T) = Top, place reinforcing bars 1 inch from top of `unit.
Refer to Structural Drawings for clear spans and lintel sections not indicated in table.

Do not splice reinforcing bars.
Support and secure reinforcing bars from displacement. Maintain position within 1/2 inch of dimensioned position.
Place and consolidate grout fill without displacing reinforcing.
Fully grout masonry course immediately above lintel for the length of the lintel.

BRICK

General: Provide shapes indicated and as follows, with exposed surfaces matching finish and color of exposed faces of adjacent units:

For ends of sills and caps and for similar applications that would otherwise expose unfinished brick surfaces, provide units without cores or frogs and with exposed surfaces finished.
Provide special shapes for applications where stretcher units cannot accommodate special conditions, including those at corners, movement joints, bond beams, sashes, and lintels.
Provide special shapes for applications requiring brick of size, form, color, and texture on exposed surfaces that cannot be produced by sawing.
Provide special shapes for applications where shapes produced by sawing would result in sawed surfaces being exposed to view.

Clay Face Brick:

Reuse salvaged brick.
Where salvaged brick is not available provide new brick to match existing adjacent brickwork in color range, texture, and size; subject to Architect’s approval, and complying with the following:

ASTM C216, Grade SW.
Type: FBX or FBS to match existing.

MORTAR AND GROUT MATERIALS

Portland Cement: ASTM C150, Type I or II. Provide natural color or white cement as required to produce mortar color indicated.

Alkali content shall not be more than 0.1 percent when tested according to ASTM C114.

Hydrated Lime: ASTM C207, Type S.

Portland Cement-Lime Mix: Packaged blend of portland cement and hydrated lime containing no other ingredients.

Masonry Cement: ASTM C91.

Mortar Cement: ASTM C1329.

Mortar Pigments: Natural and synthetic iron oxides and chromium oxides, compounded for use in mortar mixes and complying with ASTM C979. Use only pigments with a record of satisfactory performance in masonry mortar.

Manufacturer: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products from one of the following:

Davis Colors: www.daviscolors.com.
Lambert Corporation: www.lambertusa.com.


Lehigh Hanson: www.lehighhanson.com
Solomon Colors: www.solomoncolors.com.

Aggregate for Mortar: ASTM C144.

For mortar that is exposed to view, use washed aggregate consisting of natural sand or crushed stone.

Aggregate for Grout: ASTM C404.

Water: Potable.

Water-Repellent Admixture: Liquid water-repellent mortar admixture intended for use with CMUs containing integral water repellent.

Limitations:

Use only in combination with masonry units containing integral water repellent admixture.
Source Limitations: Use water repellent admixtures for masonry units and mortar from a single manufacturer.

Products: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide one of the following:

BASF Corp.; MasterPel 210MA: www.master-builders-solutions.basf.us.
Euclid Chemical Company (The); an RPM company; Blocktite Mortar Admixture: www.euclidchemical.com.
GCP Applied Technologies Inc.; Dry-Block Mortar Admixture: www.gcpat.com.

Packaged Dry Material for Mortar for Unit Masonry.

At Contractor's option, prepackaged dry material for mortar may be used subject to compliance with mortar requirements of this section including, but not limited to, the following:

Mortar Types: As indicated.
Color(s): As selected by Architect from manufacturer's full range.
Use only water repellent admixture for mortar from the same manufacturer as water repellent admixture in masonry units.

Portland Cement Based: Premixed Portland cement, hydrated lime, and sand; complying with ASTM C1714 and capable of producing mortar of the specified strength in accordance with ASTM C270 with the addition of water only.

Manufacturer: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products from one of the following:

Amerimix, an Oldcastle brand; www.amerimix.com.
The QUIKRETE Companies; wwwquikcrete.com.
SPEC MIX, Inc.: www.specmix.com.


Masonry Cement Based: Premixed masonry cement and mason's sand; complying with ASTM C1714 and capable of producing mortar of the specified strength in accordance with ASTM C270 with the addition of water only.

Manufacturer: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products from one of the following:

Amerimix, an Oldcastle brand; www.amerimix.com.
The QUIKRETE Companies; wwwquikcrete.com.
SPEC MIX, Inc.: www.specmix.com.

Packaged Dry Material for Grout for Masonry: Premixed cementitious materials and dried aggregates; capable of producing grout of the specified strength in accordance with ASTM C476 with the addition of water only.

At Contractor's option, prepackaged dry material for grout may be used subject to compliance with grout requirements of this section.
Manufacturer: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products from one of the following:

Amerimix, an Oldcastle brand; www.amerimix.com.
The QUIKRETE Companies; wwwquikcrete.com.
SPEC MIX, Inc.: www.specmix.com.

REINFORCEMENT

Manufacturers: Where Basis of Design Products are listed, comply with the following:

Basis of Design Product: The design for each item specified is based on the product named. Subject to compliance with requirements, provide either the named product or a comparable product by one of the following:

Fero Corp.; www.ferocorp.com.
Heckmann Building Products; www.heckmannbuildingprods.com.
Hohmann & Barnard, Inc.; www.h-b.com.
Wire-Bond; www.wirebond.com.

Uncoated-Steel Reinforcing Bars: ASTM A615 or ASTM A996, Grade 60 (Grade 420).

Reinforcing Bar Positioners: Wire units designed to fit into mortar bed joints spanning masonry unit cells and to hold reinforcing bars in center of cells. Units are formed from 0.156-inch steel wire, hot-dip galvanized after fabrication. Provide units designed for number of bars indicated.

Basis-of-Design Product: Hohmann & Barnard, Inc.; www.h-b.com: RB and RB-Twin Rebar Positioners.

Reinforcing Bar Lap Joint Ties: ASTM A1064 steel wire, mill galvanized to 16 CFR 1201 Class 3.

Basis-of-Design Product: Hohmann & Barnard, Inc.; www.h-b.com: Spyra-Lox Rebar Lap-Joint Tie.

Masonry-Joint Reinforcement, General: ASTM A951.

Interior Walls: Hot-dip galvanized carbon steel.
Exterior Walls: Hot-dip galvanized carbon steel.
Wire Size for Side Rods: 0.148-inch diameter.
Wire Size for Cross Rods: 0.148-inch diameter.
Wire Size for Veneer Ties: 0.187-inch diameter.


Spacing of Cross Rods, Tabs, and Cross Ties: Not more than 16 inches o.c.
Provide in lengths of not less than 10 feet, with prefabricated corner and tee units.

Masonry-Joint Reinforcement for Single-Wythe Masonry: Ladder type with single pair of side rods.

Basis-of-Design Product: Hohmann & Barnard, Inc.; www.h-b.com: 220 Ladder-Mesh.

Masonry-Joint Reinforcement for Multiwythe Masonry: Adjustable (two-piece) type, ladder design, with one side rod at each face shell of backing wythe and with separate adjustable ties with pintle-and-eye connections having a maximum horizontal play of 1/16 inch and maximum vertical adjustment of 1-1/4 inches. Size ties to extend at least halfway through facing wythe but with at least 5/8-inch cover on outside face.

Basis-of-Design Product: Hohmann & Barnard, Inc.; www.h-b.com: 270 Ladder LOX-ALL Adjustable Eye Wire with 2X-HOOK.

TIES AND ANCHORS

Manufacturers: Where Basis of Design Products are listed, comply with the following:

Basis-of-Design Product: The design for each item specified is based on the product named. Subject to compliance with requirements, provide either the named product or a comparable product by one of the following:

Fero Corp.; www.ferocorp.com.
Heckmann Building Products; www.heckmannbuildingprods.com.
Hohmann & Barnard, Inc.; www.h-b.com.
Wire-Bond; www.wirebond.com.

General: Ties and anchors shall extend at least 1-1/2 inches into veneer but with at least a 5/8-inch cover on outside face.

Materials: Provide ties and anchors specified in this article that are made from materials that comply with the following unless otherwise indicated:

Hot-Dip Galvanized, Carbon-Steel Wire: ASTM A82, with ASTM A153, Class B-2 coating.

Wire Size: 0.187-inch diameter, unless otherwise indicated.

Steel Sheet, Galvanized after Fabrication: ASTM A1008, Commercial Steel, with ASTM A153, Class B coating.
Steel Plates, Shapes, and Bars: ASTM A36.

Adjustable Masonry Veneer Anchors: 2-piece anchors that permit differential movement between masonry veneer and structural backup. Anchor plates not less than 0.075 inch thick, designed for fastening to structural backup through sheathing by two fasteners. Vertical adjustment not less than 2 inches. For cold- formed metal framing and sheathing back-up.

Basis-of-Design Product: Hohmann & Barnard, Inc.; www.h-b.com: HB-213 anchors with 2X-HOOK.

Corrugated-Metal Ties: Metal strips not less than 7/8 inch wide with corrugations having a wavelength of 0.3 to 0.5 inch and an amplitude of 0.06 to 0.10 inch made from 0.048 inch-thick (18 gage) steel sheet, galvanized after fabrication.

Basis-of-Design Product: Hohmann & Barnard, Inc.; www.h-b.com: , CWT Corrugated Wall Tie.


MASONRY CLEANERS

Proprietary Acidic Cleaner - For Brick: Manufacturer's standard-strength cleaner designed for removing mortar/grout stains, efflorescence, and other new construction stains from new masonry without discoloring or damaging masonry surfaces. Use product expressly approved for intended use by cleaner manufacturer and manufacturer of masonry units being cleaned.

Basis-of-Design Product: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide PROSOCO, Inc.; www.prosoco.com: Sure Klean 600, Sure Klean Vana Trol or a comparable product by one of the following:

Diedrich Technologies, Inc.; www.diedrichtechnologies.com.

Proprietary Acidic Cleaner – For CMU: Manufacturer's standard-strength cleaner designed for removing mortar/grout stains, efflorescence, and other new construction stains from new masonry without discoloring or damaging masonry surfaces. Use product expressly approved for intended use by cleaner manufacturer and manufacturer of masonry units being cleaned.

Basis-of-Design Product: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide PROSOCO, Inc.; www.prosoco.com: Sure Klean Light Duty Concrete Cleaner or a comparable product by one of the following:

Diedrich Technologies, Inc.; www.diedrichtechnologies.com.

MORTAR AND GROUT MIXES

General:

Use portland cement-lime, masonry cement, or mortar cement mortar unless otherwise indicated.
Do not use admixtures, including pigments, air-entraining agents, accelerators, retarders, water- repellent agents, antifreeze compounds, or other admixtures unless otherwise indicated.
Do not use calcium chloride in mortar or grout.

Preblended, Dry Mortar Mix: Furnish dry mortar ingredients in form of a preblended mix. Measure quantities by weight to ensure accurate proportions, and thoroughly blend ingredients before delivering to Project site.

Mortar for Unit Masonry: Comply with ASTM C270, Proportion Specification. Provide the following types of mortar for applications stated unless another type is indicated.

For masonry below grade or in contact with earth, use Type M.
For reinforced masonry, use Type S.
For exterior, load-bearing masonry, use Type S
For exterior, above-grade nonload-bearing walls and parapet walls, use Type N.
For interior load-bearing and nonload-bearing walls and partitions, use Type N.
For other applications where another type is not indicated, use Type N.

Pigmented Mortar: Use colored cement product or select and proportion pigments with other ingredients to produce color required. Do not add pigments to colored cement products.

Pigments shall not exceed 10 percent of portland cement by weight.
Pigments shall not exceed 5 percent of masonry cement or mortar cement by weight.
Mix to match Architect's samples.
Application: Use pigmented mortar for exposed mortar joints at the following units:

As indicated on Drawings.


Grout for Unit Masonry: Comply with ASTM C476.

Use grout of type indicated or, if not otherwise indicated, of type (fine or coarse) that will comply with TMS 602/ACI 530.1 for dimensions of grout spaces and pour height.
Proportion grout in accordance with ASTM C476, Table 1 or paragraph 4.2.2 for specified 28-day compressive strength indicated, but not less than 3000 psi.
Provide grout with a slump of 8 to 11 inches as measured according to ASTM C143.

PART 3 - EXECUTION

SALVAGING MASONRY

General: Comply with Section 02 4119 - Selective Demolition.

Where indicated, remove and salvage existing masonry.

Carefully remove masonry units by hand. Cut out full units from joint to joint.

If required, use a motor-driven saw designed to cut masonry with clean, sharp, unchipped edges.

Salvage as many whole, undamaged masonry units as needed for new construction.
Salvage damaged masonry units that may be cut and used where cut units are required.
Take care not to chip, crack or otherwise damage surrounding masonry.

Remove mortar, loose particles and soil from salvaged masonry units by cleaning with hand chisels, brushes and water. Store masonry units for reuse.

Clean remaining masonry at edges of removal areas by removing mortar, dust, and loose debris in preparation for new construction.

Support and protect remaining masonry that surrounds removal area. Maintain flashing, reinforcement, lintels, and adjoining construction in an undamaged condition.

EXAMINATION

Examine conditions, with Installer present, for compliance with requirements for installation tolerances and other conditions affecting performance of the Work.

For the record, prepare written report, endorsed by Installer, listing conditions detrimental to performance of the Work.
Verify that foundations are within tolerances specified.
Verify that reinforcing dowels are properly placed.
Verify that substrates are free of substances that impair mortar bond.
Verify that built-in items are in proper location, and ready for roughing into masonry work
Verify that related items provided under other sections are properly sized and located.
Before installation, examine rough-in and built-in construction for piping systems to verify actual locations of piping connections.

Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected.


INSTALLATION, GENERAL

Coursing and Bonding:

Match coursing and bonding of existing masonry, unless otherwise indicated on Drawings.
Establish lines, levels, and coursing indicated. Protect from displacement
Maintain masonry courses to uniform dimension. Form vertical and horizontal joints of uniform thickness.
Do not use units with less-than-nominal 4-inch horizontal face dimensions at corners or jambs.
Bond and interlock each course of each wythe at corners.
Tooth-in new masonry work with existing, unless otherwise indicated on Drawings.

Thickness: Build cavity and composite walls and other masonry construction to full thickness shown. Build single-wythe walls to actual widths of masonry units, using units of widths indicated.

Build chases and recesses to accommodate items specified in this and other Sections.

Leave openings for equipment to be installed before completing masonry. After installing equipment, complete masonry to match construction immediately adjacent to opening.

Use full-size units without cutting if possible. If cutting is required to provide a continuous pattern or to fit adjoining construction, cut units with motor-driven saws; provide clean, sharp, unchipped edges. Allow units to dry before laying unless wetting of units is specified. Install cut units with cut surfaces and, where possible, cut edges concealed.

Select and arrange units for exposed unit masonry to produce a uniform blend of colors and textures. Mix units from several pallets or cubes as they are placed.

Wetting of Brick: Wet brick before laying if initial rate of absorption exceeds 30 g/30 sq. in.per minute when tested according to ASTM C67. Allow units to absorb water so they are damp but not wet at time of laying.

LAYING MASONRY WALLS

Lay out walls in advance for accurate spacing of surface bond patterns with uniform joint thicknesses and for accurate location of openings, movement-type joints, returns, and offsets. Avoid using less-than-half-size units, particularly at corners, jambs, and, where possible, at other locations.

Stopping and Resuming Work: Stop work by stepping back units in each course from those in course below; do not tooth. When resuming work, clean masonry surfaces that are to receive mortar, remove loose masonry units and mortar, and wet brick if required before laying fresh masonry.

Built-in Work: As construction progresses, build in items specified in this and other Sections. Fill in solidly with masonry around built-in items.

Wall Penetrations:

Cut and set masonry units tightly around steel, pipes, conduit, and other wall penetrations; space between penetrating items and masonry shall not exceed 1 inch in width unless otherwise indicated.
Fill space between penetrating items and masonry solidly with mortar unless otherwise indicated.
At fire-rated wall construction, refer to Section 07 8413 – Firestopping, for application of firestopping materials.

Where built-in items are to be embedded in cores of hollow masonry units, place a layer of metal lath, wire mesh, or plastic mesh in the joint below, and rod mortar or grout into core.

Fill cores in hollow CMUs with grout 16 inches under bearing plates, beams, lintels, posts, and similar items unless otherwise indicated.


Build nonload-bearing interior partitions full height of story to underside of solid floor or roof structure above unless otherwise indicated.

Install compressible filler in joint between top of partition and underside of structure above.

MORTAR BEDDING AND JOINTING

Lay CMUs as follows:

Bed face shells in mortar and make head joints of depth equal to bed joints.
Bed webs in mortar in all courses of piers, columns, and pilasters.
Bed webs in mortar in grouted masonry, including starting course on footings.
Fully bed entire units, including areas under cells, at starting course on footings where cells are not grouted.
Fully bed units and fill cells with mortar at anchors and ties as needed to fully embed anchors and ties in mortar.

Lay solid masonry units with completely filled bed and head joints; butter ends with sufficient mortar to fill head joints and shove into place. Do not deeply furrow bed joints or slush head joints.

Do not shift or tap masonry units after mortar has achieved initial set. Where adjustment must be made, remove mortar and replace.

Tool exposed joints slightly concave when thumbprint hard, using a jointer larger than joint thickness unless otherwise indicated.

Cut joints flush at the following locations:

Where wall tile is scheduled.
At masonry walls to receive plaster or other direct-applied finishes (other than paint) unless otherwise indicated.
Where indicated to receive waterproofing, wall insulation, or air barriers unless otherwise indicated.

MASONRY-JOINT REINFORCEMENT

General: Install entire length of longitudinal side rods in mortar with a minimum cover of 5/8 inch on exterior side of walls, 1/2 inch elsewhere. Lap reinforcement a minimum of 6 inches.

Space reinforcement not more than 16 inches o.c.
Space reinforcement not more than 8 inches o.c. in foundation walls and parapet walls.
Place masonry joint reinforcement in first and second horizontal joints above and below openings. Extend minimum 16 inches each side of opening.

Interrupt joint reinforcement at control and expansion joints unless otherwise indicated.

Provide continuity at corners by using prefabricated L-shaped units.

Cut and bend reinforcing units as directed by manufacturer for continuity at returns, offsets, column fireproofing, pipe enclosures, and other special conditions.

Intersecting and Abutting Walls: Unless vertical expansion or control joints are indicated at juncture, bond walls together using one of the following, unless otherwise indicated on Drawings:

Provide continuity with masonry-joint reinforcement by using prefabricated T-shaped units.
Provide rigid metal anchors not more than 24 inches o.c., embed ends in mortar-filled cores.


REINFORCED UNIT MASONRY AND GROUTING

Placing Reinforcement: Comply with requirements in TMS 402/602.

Grouting: Do not place grout until entire height of masonry to be grouted has attained enough strength to resist grout pressure.

Comply with requirements in TMS 402/602 for cleanouts and for grout placement, including minimum grout space and maximum pour height.
Support and secure reinforcing bars from displacement. Maintain position within 1/2 inch of dimensioned position.
Place and consolidate grout fill without displacing reinforcing.

LINTELS

Install steel lintels where indicated.

Provide steel, concrete, or masonry lintels at the following locations:

Where indicated on Drawings
At openings of more than 12 inches wide at modular brick-size units and 24 inches wide at CMU block-size units; whether or not a lintel is indicated on Drawings.

Provide minimum bearing of 8 inches at each jamb unless otherwise indicated.

Fully grout masonry course immediately above masonry and concrete lintels for the length of the lintel.

COMPOSITE MASONRY

Bond wythes of composite masonry together as follows:

Masonry-Joint Reinforcement: Installed in horizontal mortar joints.

Where bed joints of both wythes align, use ladder-type reinforcement extending across both wythes.
Where bed joints of wythes do not align, use adjustable-type (two-piece-type) reinforcement.

Collar Joints: Solidly fill collar joints by parging face of first wythe that is laid and shoving units of other wythe into place.

Corners: Provide interlocking masonry unit bond in each wythe and course at corners unless otherwise indicated.

Provide continuity with masonry-joint reinforcement at corners by using prefabricated L-shaped units as well as masonry bonding.

Intersecting and Abutting Walls: Unless vertical expansion or control joints are shown at juncture, bond walls together using one of the following methods:

Provide continuity with masonry-joint reinforcement by using prefabricated T-shaped units.
Provide rigid metal anchors not more than 24 inches o.c. If used with hollow masonry units, embed ends in mortar-filled cores.


CAVITY WALLS

Bond wythes of cavity walls together as follows:

Masonry-Joint Reinforcement: Installed in horizontal mortar joints.

Where bed joints of both wythes align, use ladder-type reinforcement extending across both wythes.
Where bed joints of wythes do not align, use adjustable-type (two-piece-type) reinforcement.
Where one wythe is of clay masonry and the other of concrete masonry, use adjustable-type (two-piece-type) reinforcement to allow for differential movement regardless of whether bed joints align.
Embed tie sections in masonry joints. Provide minimum cover of 5/8 inch on exterior side of walls, 1/2 inch elsewhere.

Keep cavities clean of mortar droppings and other materials during construction. Bevel beds away from cavity, to minimize mortar protrusions into cavity. Do not attempt to trowel or remove mortar fins protruding into cavity.

TOLERANCES

Dimensions and Locations of Elements:

For dimensions in cross section or elevation, do not vary by more than plus 1/2 inch or minus 1/4 inch.
For location of elements in plan, do not vary from that indicated by more than plus or minus 1/2 inch.
For location of elements in elevation, do not vary from that indicated by more than plus or minus 1/4 inch in a story height or 1/2 inch total.

Lines and Levels:

For bed joints and top surfaces of bearing walls, do not vary from level by more than 1/4 inch in 10 feet, or 1/2-inch maximum.
For conspicuous horizontal lines, such as lintels, sills, parapets, and reveals, do not vary from level by more than 1/8 inch in 10 feet, 1/4 inch in 20 feet, or 1/2-inch maximum.
For vertical lines and surfaces, do not vary from plumb by more than 1/4 inch in 10 feet, 3/8 inch in 20 feet, or 1/2-inch maximum.
For conspicuous vertical lines, such as external corners, door jambs, reveals, and expansion and control joints, do not vary from plumb by more than 1/8 inch in 10 feet, 1/4 inch in 20 feet, or 1/2-inch maximum.
For lines and surfaces, do not vary from straight by more than 1/4 inch in 10 feet, 3/8 inch in 20 feet, or 1/2-inch maximum.
For vertical alignment of exposed head joints, do not vary from plumb by more than 1/4 inch in 10 feet, or 1/2-inc maximum.
For faces of adjacent exposed masonry units, do not vary from flush alignment by more than 1/16 inch except due to warpage of masonry units within tolerances specified for warpage of units.

Joints:

For bed joints, do not vary from thickness indicated by more than plus or minus 1/8 inch, with a maximum thickness limited to 1/2 inch.
For exposed bed joints, do not vary from bed-joint thickness of adjacent courses by more than 1/8 inch.
For head and collar joints, do not vary from thickness indicated by more than plus 3/8 inch or minus 1/4 inch.


For exposed head joints, do not vary from thickness indicated by more than plus or minus 1/8 inch Do not vary from adjacent bed-joint and head-joint thicknesses by more than 1/8 inch.
For exposed bed joints and head joints of stacked bond, do not vary from a straight line by more than 1/16 inch from one masonry unit to the next.

REPAIRING, POINTING, AND CLEANING

Remove and replace masonry units that are loose, chipped, broken, stained, or otherwise damaged or that do not match adjoining units. Install new units to match adjoining units; install in fresh mortar, pointed to eliminate evidence of replacement.

Pointing: During the tooling of joints, enlarge voids and holes, except weep holes, and completely fill with mortar. Point up joints, including corners, openings, and adjacent construction, to provide a neat, uniform appearance. Prepare joints for sealant application, where indicated.

In-Progress Cleaning: Clean unit masonry as work progresses by dry brushing to remove mortar fins and smears before tooling joints.

Final Cleaning: After mortar is thoroughly set and cured, clean exposed masonry as follows:

Remove large mortar particles by hand with wooden paddles and nonmetallic scrape hoes or chisels.
Test cleaning methods on sample wall panel; leave one-half of panel uncleaned for comparison purposes. Obtain Architect's approval of sample cleaning before proceeding with cleaning of masonry.
Protect adjacent stone and nonmasonry surfaces from contact with cleaner by covering them with liquid strippable masking agent or polyethylene film and waterproof masking tape.
Wet wall surfaces with water before applying cleaners; remove cleaners promptly by rinsing surfaces thoroughly with clear water.
Clean masonry using one or more of the following methods:

Clean brick by bucket-and-brush hand-cleaning method described in BIA Technical Notes 20.
Clean concrete masonry by applicable cleaning methods indicated in NCMA TEK 8-4A.
Clean masonry with a proprietary acidic cleaner applied according to manufacturer's written instructions.

MASONRY WASTE DISPOSAL

Salvageable Materials: Unless otherwise indicated, excess masonry materials are Contractor's property. At completion of unit masonry work, remove from Project site.

Masonry Waste Recycling: Return broken CMUs to manufacturer for recycling.

Excess Masonry Waste: Remove excess masonry waste that cannot be recycled and legally dispose of off Owner's property.


END OF SECTION 04 2000


SECTION 07 9200 - JOINT SEALANTS

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

This Section includes:

Silicone joint sealants.
Latex joint sealants.
Joint backings and accessories.

ACTION SUBMITTALS

Product Data: For each joint-sealant product indicated.

Samples for Initial Selection: Manufacturer's color charts consisting of strips of cured sealants showing the full range of colors available for each product exposed to view.

Samples for Verification: For each kind and color of joint sealant required, provide Samples with joint sealants in 1/2-inch-wide joints formed between two 6-inch-long strips of material matching the appearance of exposed surfaces adjacent to joint sealants.

Joint-Sealant Schedule: Include the following information:

Joint-sealant application, joint location, and designation.
Joint-sealant manufacturer and product name.
Joint-sealant formulation.
Joint-sealant color.

INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS

Product Test Reports: For each kind of joint sealant, for tests performed by manufacturer and witnessed by a qualified testing agency.

Sample Warranties: For special warranties.

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Installer Qualifications: Company specializing in performing the work of this section and with at least 5 years of documented experience.

Source Limitations: Obtain each type of joint sealant through one source from a single manufacturer.

FIELD CONDITIONS

Do not proceed with installation of joint sealants under the following conditions:

When ambient and substrate temperature conditions are outside limits permitted by joint-sealant manufacturer or are below 40 deg F.
When joint substrates are wet.


Where joint widths are less than those allowed by joint-sealant manufacturer for applications indicated.
Where contaminants capable of interfering with adhesion have not yet been removed from joint substrates.

WARRANTY

Special Installer's Warranty: Installer agrees to repair or replace joint sealants that do not comply with installation, performance and other requirements specified in this Section within specified warranty period.

Warranty Period: Two years from date of Substantial Completion.

Special Manufacturer's Warranty: Manufacturer agrees to furnish joint sealants to repair or replace those joint sealants that do not comply with performance and manufacturing requirements specified in this Section within specified warranty period.

Warranty Period: Five years from date of Substantial Completion.

Special warranties specified in this article exclude deterioration or failure of joint sealants from the following:

Movement of the structure caused by stresses on the sealant exceeding sealant manufacturer's written specifications for sealant elongation and compression.
Disintegration of joint substrates from causes exceeding design specifications.
Mechanical damage caused by individuals, tools, or other outside agents.
Changes in sealant appearance caused by accumulation of dirt or other atmospheric contaminants.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

JOINT SEALANTS, GENERAL

Compatibility: Provide joint sealants, backings, and other related materials that are compatible with one another and with joint substrates under conditions of service and application, as demonstrated by joint- sealant manufacturer, based on testing and field experience.

Colors of Exposed Joint Sealants: As selected by Architect from manufacturer's full range, unless otherwise indicated.

PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS

Provide exterior joint sealants that establish and maintain watertight and airtight continuous joint seals without staining or deteriorating joint substrates.

Provide joint sealants for interior applications that establish and maintain airtight and water-resistant continuous joint seals without staining or deteriorating joint substrates.

SILICONE JOINT SEALANTS

Silicone, Nonstaining – JS1:

ASTM C920, Type S, Grade NS, Class 50; Uses NT, A, G, M and O.
Non-Staining: No staining of substrates when tested according to ASTM C1248.
Cure Type: Single-component, neutral-curing.
Hardness Range: Comply with one of the following:

15 to 35, Shore A, when tested in accordance with ASTM C661.
25 to 35, Shore A, when tested in accordance with ASTM D2240.


Products: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide one of the following:

Dow Corning Corporation; Dowsil 756 SMS Building Sealant: www.dow.com.
Momentive Performance Materials, Inc./GE; SCS9000 SilPruf NB: www.siliconeforbuilding.com.
Pecora Corporation; 890NST: www.pecora.com.
Sika Corporation; Sikasil WS-295 FPS: www.usa.sika.com.
Tremco, Inc.; Spectrem 3: www.tremcosealants.com.

LATEX JOINT SEALANTS

Acrylic Latex – JS5:

Acrylic latex or siliconized acrylic latex
ASTM C834, Type OP, Grade NF or Minus 18 Degrees C (0 Degrees F).
Products: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide one of the following:

Bostik, Inc.; PWC; www.bostik.com.
Franklin International Inc; Titebond Painter's Plus Caulk: www.titebond.com.
Pecora Corporation; AC-20 +Silicone: www.pecora.com.
Sherwin Williams; 950A Siliconized Acrylic Latex Caulk: www.sherwin-williams.com.
Tremco, Inc.; Tremflex 834: www.tremcosealants.com.

JOINT-SEALANT BACKING

Sealant Backing Material, General: Nonstaining; compatible with joint substrates, sealants, primers, and other joint fillers; and approved for applications indicated by sealant manufacturer based on field experience and laboratory testing.

Cylindrical Sealant Backings (Backer Rod): ASTM C1330, Type C (closed-cell material with a surface skin) or Type B (bicellular material with a surface skin) as approved in writing by joint-sealant manufacturer for joint application indicated, and of size and density to control sealant depth and otherwise contribute to producing optimum sealant performance.

Bond-Breaker Tape: Polyethylene tape or other plastic tape recommended by sealant manufacturer for preventing sealant from adhering to rigid, inflexible joint-filler materials or joint surfaces at back of joint. Provide self-adhesive tape where applicable.

MISCELLANEOUS MATERIALS

Primer: Material recommended by joint-sealant manufacturer where required for adhesion of sealant to joint substrates indicated, as determined from preconstruction joint-sealant-substrate tests and field tests.

Cleaners for Nonporous Surfaces: Chemical cleaners acceptable to manufacturers of sealants and sealant backing materials, free of oily residues or other substances capable of staining or harming joint substrates and adjacent nonporous surfaces in any way and formulated to promote optimum adhesion of sealants to joint substrates.

Masking Tape: Nonstaining, nonabsorbent material compatible with joint sealants and surfaces adjacent to joints.


PART 3 - EXECUTION

EXAMINATION

Examine joints indicated to receive joint sealants, with Installer present, for compliance with requirements for joint configuration, installation tolerances, and other conditions affecting performance of the Work.

Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected.

PREPARATION

Surface Cleaning of Joints: Clean out joints immediately before installing joint sealants to comply with joint- sealant manufacturer's written instructions and the following requirements:

Remove all foreign material from joint substrates that could interfere with adhesion of joint sealant, including dust, paints (except for permanent, protective coatings tested and approved for sealant adhesion and compatibility by sealant manufacturer), old joint sealants, oil, grease, waterproofing, water repellents, water, surface dirt, and frost.
Clean porous joint substrate surfaces by brushing, grinding, mechanical abrading, or a combination of these methods to produce a clean, sound substrate capable of developing optimum bond with joint sealants. Remove loose particles remaining after cleaning operations above by vacuuming or blowing out joints with oil-free compressed air. Porous joint substrates include, but are not limited to, the following:

Concrete.
Masonry.

Remove laitance and form-release agents from concrete.
Clean nonporous joint substrate surfaces with chemical cleaners or other means that do not stain, harm substrates, or leave residues capable of interfering with adhesion of joint sealants. Nonporous joint substrates include, but are not limited to, the following:

Metal.
Glass.
Porcelain enamel.

Joint Priming: Prime joint substrates where recommended by joint-sealant manufacturer or as indicated by preconstruction joint-sealant-substrate tests or prior experience. Apply primer to comply with joint-sealant manufacturer's written instructions. Confine primers to areas of joint-sealant bond; do not allow spillage or migration onto adjoining surfaces.

Masking Tape: Use masking tape where required to prevent contact of sealant or primer with adjoining surfaces that otherwise would be permanently stained or damaged by such contact or by cleaning methods required to remove sealant smears. Remove tape immediately after tooling without disturbing joint seal.

INSTALLATION OF JOINT SEALANTS

General: Comply with joint-sealant manufacturer's written installation instructions for products and applications indicated, unless more stringent requirements apply.

Sealant Installation Standard: Comply with recommendations in ASTM C1193 for use of joint sealants as applicable to materials, applications, and conditions indicated.


Install sealant backings of kind indicated to support sealants during application and at position required to produce cross-sectional shapes and depths of installed sealants relative to joint widths that allow optimum sealant movement capability.

Do not leave gaps between ends of sealant backings.
Do not stretch, twist, puncture, or tear sealant backings.
Remove absorbent sealant backings that have become wet before sealant application and replace them with dry materials.

Install bond-breaker tape behind sealants where sealant backings are not used between sealants and backs of joints.

Install sealants using proven techniques that comply with the following and at the same time backings are installed:

Place sealants so they directly contact and fully wet joint substrates.
Completely fill recesses in each joint configuration.
Produce uniform, cross-sectional shapes and depths relative to joint widths that allow optimum sealant movement capability.

Tooling of Nonsag Sealants: Immediately after sealant application and before skinning or curing begins, tool sealants according to requirements specified in subparagraphs below to form smooth, uniform beads of configuration indicated; to eliminate air pockets; and to ensure contact and adhesion of sealant with sides of joint.

Remove excess sealant from surfaces adjacent to joints.
Use tooling agents that are approved in writing by sealant manufacturer and that do not discolor sealants or adjacent surfaces.
Provide concave joint profile per Figure 8A in ASTM C1193 unless otherwise indicated or recommended by sealant manufacturer.

Use masking tape to protect surfaces adjacent to tooled joints.

CLEANING

Clean off excess sealant or sealant smears adjacent to joints as the Work progresses by methods and with cleaning materials approved in writing by manufacturers of joint sealants and of products in which joints occur.

PROTECTION

Protect joint sealants during and after curing period from contact with contaminating substances and from damage resulting from construction operations or other causes so sealants are without deterioration or damage at time of Substantial Completion. If, despite such protection, damage or deterioration occurs, cut out, remove, and repair damaged or deteriorated joint sealants immediately so installations with repaired areas are indistinguishable from original work.

JOINT-SEALANT SCHEDULE

Vertical and Horizontal Nontraffic Surfaces:

Exterior Joints:

Joint Sealant: Silicone, Nonstaining – JS1.


Interior Joints:

Latex Joint Sealant: Acrylic Latex – JS5.


END OF SECTION 07 9200


SECTION 09 9600 - HIGH-PERFORMANCE COATINGS

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

Section Includes:

High performance coatings - non-traffic surfaces.

DEFINITIONS

Conform to ASTM D16 for interpretation of terms used in this section

DFT: Dry film thickness, measured in mils.

WFT: Wet film thickness, measured in mils.

Mils: One one-thousandth of an inch. Used to measure thickness of coating films.

ACTION SUBMITTALS

Product Data: For each type of product. Include preparation requirements and application instructions. Include the following:

Indicate VOC content.
Manufacturer's name, product name and/or catalog number, and general product category.

Example of general product categories:

Interior finish coat - latex, eggshell.
Exterior primer for ferrous metal.

For each high-performance coating system and substrate, indicate which products are to be used.

Examples:

Interior Waterborne Acrylic Epoxy Paint for Concrete Masonry Units:

Primer: Name of specific product provided.
Finish Coats: Name of specific product provided.

Interior High Performance Coating for Structural Steel.

Primer: Name of specific product provided.
Intermediate Coat: Name of specific product provided.
Top Coat: Name of specific product provided.

Use same designations indicated on Drawings and Schedules.


Samples: Submit 3 paper "draw down" samples, 8-1/2 by 11 inches in size, illustrating each color and finish specified.

High-performance coating color submittals will not be considered until color submittals for major materials not to be painted, such as masonry and storefront finishes, have been approved.

INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS

Qualification Data: For installer.

MAINTENANCE MATERIAL SUBMITTALS

Paint Maintenance Manual: Submit coating maintenance manual including:

Finish schedule showing where each product, color, and finish was used.
Product technical data sheets.
Material safety data sheets (MSDS).
Care and cleaning instructions.
Touch-up procedures.
Repair of painted and finished surfaces.

Color Chips: After final approval of all colors, submit color chips of all coatings used with manufacturer’s name, product, and mix formulation of each color, finish, and coating for the purpose of future re-ordering of coatings.

Color chips shall be at least six (6) inches square.
Include in Paint Maintenance Manual.

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Applicator Qualifications: Company specializing in performing the type of work specified with minimum 5 years documented experience.

Only qualified journeypersons, as defined by local jurisdiction, shall be engaged in high-performance coating work. Apprentices may be employed provided they work under the direct supervision of a qualified journeyperson in accordance with trade regulations.

DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING

Store materials not in use in tightly covered containers in well-ventilated areas with ambient temperatures continuously maintained at not less than 45 deg F.

Maintain containers in clean condition, free of foreign materials and residue.
Remove rags and waste from storage areas daily.

FIELD CONDITIONS

Apply coatings only when temperature of surfaces to be painted and ambient air temperatures are between 50 and 95 deg F.

Do not apply coatings when relative humidity exceeds 85 percent; at temperatures of less than 5 deg F above the dew point; or to damp or wet surfaces.

Work may continue during inclement weather if surfaces and areas to be coated are enclosed and heated within temperature limits specified by manufacturer during application and drying periods.


Apply coatings only to dry, clean, and adequately prepared surfaces in areas where dust is no longer generated by construction activities such that airborne particles will not affect the quality of finished surfaces.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

MANUFACTURERS

Source Limitations:

Provide coating products from same manufacturer, unless otherwise specified.
Obtain block fillers and primers for each coating system from the same manufacturer as the finish coats, unless otherwise specified.
Exceptions shall be permitted, provided approval of Architect is obtained using specified procedures for substitutions.

High Performance Coating Manufacturers: For each coating specified in Part 2, provide one of the products listed, subject to compliance with requirements. Products shall be from one of the following:

Benjamin Moore: Benjamin Moore & Co.: www: benjaminmoore.com.
Carboline Company www.carboline.com.
PPG: PPG Industries, Inc., Architectural Coatings: www.ppgpaints.com.
Sherwin-Williams: The Sherwin-Williams Company: www: sherwin-williams.com.
Tnemec: Tnemec Company Inc.: www.tnemec.com.

HIGH-PERFORMANCE COATINGS, GENERAL

Material Compatibility:

Materials for use within each paint system shall be compatible with one another and substrates indicated, under conditions of service and application as demonstrated by manufacturer, based on testing and field experience.
For each coat in a paint system, products shall be recommended in writing by top coat manufacturers for use in paint system and on substrate indicated.
Shop-applied Primer Compatibility for Steel: Field-applied primers and top coats shall be compatible with one another and shop-applied primers. Refer to Division 05 sections for shop-applied primers for steel.

VOC Content:

Determination of VOC Content: Testing and calculation in accordance with 40 CFR 59, Subpart D (EPA Method 24), exclusive of colorants added to a tint base and water added at project site; or other method acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction
For field applications that are inside the weatherproofing system, paints and coatings shall comply with the following VOC content limits unless stricter limits are required by authorities having jurisdiction:

Flat Paints and Coatings: 50 g/L.
Nonflat Paints and Coatings: 50 g/L.
Primers, Sealers, and Undercoaters: 100 g/L.
Rust-Preventive Coatings: 100 g/L.
Zinc-Rich Industrial Maintenance Primers: 100 g/L.

Supply each coating material in quantity required to complete entire project's work from a single production run.

Do not reduce, thin, or dilute paint or finishes or add materials unless such procedure is specifically described in manufacturer's product instructions.


Coating Finishes: Gloss and sheen levels.

Product names are not acceptable for coating finish identification.

For coating finishes specified, provide one of the listed products; some listed products may not comply with gloss and sheen levels as defined by this Section.
Coating finishes of product substitution requests shall comply with gloss and sheen levels as defined by this Section for the coating finish specified.

Coating finishes shall be defined by the coating’s gloss and sheen levels as determined by testing coating samples according to ASTM D523, using 60 (Gloss) and 85 (Sheen) degree geometry. Coating finish gloss and sheen shall be as follows:

Level 1 – Flat/Matte: Comply with both of the following:

60 Degrees: Value not more than 5 units.
85 Degrees: Value not more than 10 units.

Level 2 – Velvet: Comply with both of the following:

60 Degrees: Value not more than 10 units.
85 Degrees: Value between 10 and 35 units.

Level 3 – Eggshell: Comply with both of the following:

60 Degrees: Value between 10 and 25 units.
85 Degrees: Value between 10 and 35 units.

Level 4 – Satin: Comply with both of the following:

60 Degrees: Value between 20 and 35 units.
85 Degrees: Value not less than 35 units.

Level 5 – Semigloss:

60 Degrees: Value between 35 and 70 units.

Level 6 – Gloss:

60 Degrees: Value between 70 and 85 units.

Level 7 – High Gloss:

60 Degrees: Value more than 85 units.

Where coating finishes are not specified, provide finish as selected by Architect.

Colors: As indicated in Room Finish Schedule on Drawings or, if not indicated, to match Architect’s samples.

For opaque coatings, tint each coat including primer coat and intermediate coats, one-half shade lighter than succeeding coat, with final top coat as indicated color.


INTERIOR HIGH PERFORMANCE COATINGS - NON-TRAFFIC SURFACES

General:

Unless otherwise indicated, each high performance coating system consists of the following:

Primer: One coat based on substrate material.
Top Coats: Two coats based on required finish and substrate material.

Required Finishes: For each high performance coating, provide paint finishes as follows unless otherwise indicated:

All High performance coatings: Semigloss.

Interior High Performance Systems – Non-Traffic Surfaces.

Primers:

Primer for concrete: Two-component epoxy or acrylic/latex primer.

Benjamin Moore: Ultra Spec High Build Primer N609; DFT 2.0 to 3.0 mils.
Carboline; Sanitile 120; DFT 1.0 to 2.0 mils.
PPG; Perma-Crete Interior/Exterior Alkali Resistant Primer, 4-603XI; DFT 1.4 to 2.6 mils.
Sherwin Williams; Loxon Concrete and Masonry Primer-Sealer LX02; DFT 2.1 to 3.2 mils.

Block Filler/primer for concrete masonry units: Acrylic/latex block filler, water-based.

Benjamin Moore: Ultra Spec Hi Build Masonry Block Filler 571; DFT 8.5 to 11.3 mils.
Carboline; Sanitle 100; DFT 6.0 to 12.0 mils.
PPG; Perma-Crete Concrete & Masonry Surfacer/Filler 4-100XI; DFT 8.0 to 11.0 mils.
Sherwin Williams:

For Gloss Finish Top Coat: Pro Industrial Heavy Duty Block Filler B42 Series;
DFT 8.0 to 10.5 mils
For Semigloss and Eggshell Finish Top Coats: Loxon Acrylic Block Surfacer LX01 Series; DFT 8.8 mils.

Primer for aluminum, ferrous metal, and galvanized steel: Rust-inhibitive acrylic/latex primer, water-based.

Benjamin Moore; Ultra Spec HP Acrylic Metal Primer HP04 ; DFT 1.7 to 2.3 mils.
Carboline; Carbocrylic 3358; DFT 2.0 to 3.0 mils.
PPG; Pitt-Tech Plus 4020 PF; DFT 2.2 to 3.5 mils.
Sherwin Williams; Pro Industrial Pro-Cryl Universal Primer B66 Series; DFT 1.9 to 3.8 mils.

Primer for gypsum board, and gypsum plaster: Acrylic/latex primer, water-based.

Benjamin Moore; Super Hide Zero VOC Interior Latex Primer 354; DFT 1.3 mils.
Carboline; Sanitile 120; DFT 1.0 to 2.0 mils.
PPG; Speedhide Zero Interior Zero VOC & Low Oder Primer 6-4900XI; DFT 1.4 mils.
Sherwin Williams; ProMar 200 Zero V.O.C. Interior Latex Primer B28W02600; DFT 1.0 mils.


Primer for previously painted surfaces; including concrete and masonry: Acrylic/latex stain- blocking primer/sealer with high adhesion, water-based.

Benjamin Moore; Insul-X Prime All Multi-Surface Latex Primer Sealer AP-1000; DFT
1.3 mils.
Carboline; Sanitile 120; DFT 1.0 to 2.0 mils.
PPG; Seal Grip Gripper Interior/Exterior 100% Acrylic Latex Primer 17-921XI Series; DFT 1.6 mils.
Sherwin Williams; PrepRite ProBlock Interior-Exterior Latex Primer-Sealer B51-600 Series; DFT 1.4 mils.

Primer for insulated piping and insulated ductwork: Acrylic/latex stain-blocking primer/sealer with high adhesion, water-based.

Benjamin Moore; Insul-X Prime All Multi-Surface Latex Primer Sealer AP-1000; DFT
1.3 mils.
Carboline; Sanitile 120; DFT 1.0 to 2.0 mils.
PPG; Seal Grip Gripper Interior/Exterior 100% Acrylic Latex Primer 17-921XI Series; DFT 1.6 mils.
Sherwin Williams; PrepRite ProBlock Interior-Exterior Latex Primer-Sealer B51-600 Series; DFT 1.4 mils.

Top Coats:

Semigloss Finish: Single or multi component, waterbased, acrylic epoxy.

Finish coats for all surfaces:

Benjamin Moore; Corotech Pre-Catalyzed Waterborne Epoxy Semi-Gloss V341; DFT 1.5 to 1.9 mils
Carboline; Sanitile 255 - Semi-Gloss; DFT 2.0 to 3.0 mils.
PPG; Aquapon WB EP Semi-Gloss; DFT 2.0 to 3.0 mils.
Sherwin Williams; Pro Industrial Pre-Catalyzed Waterbased Epoxy Semi-Gloss K46 Series; DFT 1.5 mils.

ACCESSORY MATERIALS

Accessory Materials: Provide cleaning materials, preparation materials, and miscellaneous materials required to properly prepare and apply coatings.

PART 3 - EXECUTION

EXAMINATION

Examine substrates and conditions, with Applicator present, for compliance with requirements for maximum moisture content and other conditions affecting performance of the Work.

Maximum Moisture Content of Substrates: When measured with an electronic moisture meter as follows:

Concrete: 12 percent.
Masonry (Clay and CMUs): 12 percent.
Gypsum Board: 12 percent.

Gypsum Board Substrates: Verify that finishing compound is sanded smooth.

Verify suitability of substrates, including surface conditions and compatibility with existing finishes and primers.


Proceed with coating application only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected.

Application of coating indicates acceptance of surfaces and conditions.

PREPARATION

Comply with manufacturer's written instructions and recommendations applicable to substrates and paint systems indicated.

Protect adjacent surfaces not to be painted.

Clean substrates of substances that could impair bond of coatings, including dust, dirt, oil, grease, and incompatible paints and encapsulants.

For coatings applied over previously painted surfaces, test application to check for lifting and other adhesion problems. Perform test in an isolated area where practicable.
Remove incompatible coatings and primers or apply barrier tie coat as recommended by paint manufacturer and as required to produce paint systems indicated.

Remove hardware, covers, plates, and similar items already in place that are removable and are not to be painted. If removal is impractical or impossible because of size or weight of item, provide surface-applied protection before surface preparation and painting.

After completing coating operations, use workers skilled in the trades involved to reinstall items that were removed. Remove surface-applied protection if any.

Concrete Substrates: Remove release agents, curing compounds, efflorescence, and chalk. Do not apply coatings to surfaces if moisture content or alkalinity of surfaces to be coated exceeds that permitted in manufacturer's written instructions.

Clean concrete according to ASTM D4258. Allow to dry.
Where required or recommended by coating manufacturer, abrasive blast clean surfaces to comply with SSPC-SP 13/NACE No. 6 to produce a uniform surface profile acceptable to manufacturer but not less than ICRI CSP 3.

Masonry Substrates: Remove efflorescence and chalk. Do not coat surfaces if moisture content or alkalinity of surfaces or mortar joints exceeds that permitted in manufacturer's written instructions.

Steel Substrates - Unpainted or Unprimed: Remove rust, loose mill scale, and shop primer, if any. Clean using methods recommended in writing by paint manufacturer but not less than the following:

SSPC-SP 6 - Commercial Blast Cleaning.

Shop-Primed Steel Substrates: Clean field welds, bolted connections, and areas where shop paint is abraded. Sand and scrape to remove loose primer and rust. Feather edges of remaining primer to make inconspicuous.

Clean using methods recommended in writing by paint manufacturer but not less than the following:

SSPC-PA 1.

Before applying finish coats, applicator/installer shall re-prime entire shop-primed item with steel primer specified in this section.


Galvanized-Metal Substrates: Remove passivation coating/rinse, grease and oil residue from galvanized metal to produce clean, lightly etched surfaces that promote adhesion of subsequently applied paints. Clean using methods recommended in writing by paint manufacturer but not less than ASTM D6386, ASTM D7396, and the following:

Remove surface contamination and oils in accordance with SSPC-SP 1 - Solvent Cleaning.
Remove loose paint, rust, and other debris according to SSPC-SP 2 - Hand Tool Cleaning.
Lightly profile galvanized surfaces and remove zinc oxide and zinc hydroxide layers in accordance with SSPC-SP16 – Brush-Off/Sweep Blast Cleaning.
Apply paint within 1 hour of cleaning and preparation.

Aluminum Substrates: Remove loose surface oxidation. Clean using methods recommended in writing by paint manufacturer but not less than the following:

SSPC-SP 1 - Solvent Cleaning.
Where required or recommended by coating manufacturer, lightly abrade uniformly to create a surface profile acceptable to coating manufacturer.

Previously Painted Surfaces - General:

Remove all surface contamination such as oil, grease, loose paint, mill scale, dirt, foreign matter, rust, mold, mildew, mortar, and any other surface contamination.
Remove masking tape, labels, adhesives, and other materials that would either be deleterious to adhesion of, or show through, new paint.
Scrape all loose, blistered, peeling, scratched or otherwise imperfect paint down to bare substrate and sand adjacent tightly adhering paint to feather edge.
Spot prime all bare areas with appropriate primer before priming entire surface.

Repair of Existing Gypsum Board and Plaster:

Fill hairline cracks, small holes, and imperfections with filler compound and sand smooth.

APPLICATION - GENERAL

Apply coatings according to manufacturer's written instructions.

Use applicators and techniques suited for paint and substrate indicated.

Provide smooth, opaque coatings of uniform finish, color, appearance, and coverage without brush marks, runs, sags, laps, ropiness, holidays, spotting, cloudiness, or other surface imperfections.

Terminate coatings in neat lines; cut in sharp lines and color breaks.

Apply coating products to properly prepared surfaces.

Do not apply coatings over dirt, rust, scale, grease, moisture, or other conditions detrimental to application of coatings.

Primers:

Block Fillers: Apply block fillers to concrete masonry block at a rate to ensure complete coverage with pores filled.
Apply first coat of primer to surfaces as soon as practical after preparation and before subsequent surface deterioration.
Re-prime shop-primed surfaces.


Do not apply succeeding coats until previous coat has cured as recommended by manufacturer.

Sand between coats as recommended by manufacturer; before applying next coat clean surfaces of loose particles and use tack cloth to remove any remaining dust and particles just prior to applying next coat.

Provide completed work matching approved samples for color, finish, texture, coverage and quality of work.

Remove, refinish, or repaint work not complying with requirements.

Number of Coats: Each coating system in Part 2 specifies a number of coats. This is the minimum number required.

If undercoats, stains, or other imperfections are visible after final coating is applied, apply additional coats until paint is of uniform finish, color, and appearance without defects or imperfections.

Minimum Coating Thickness: Provide dry film thickness for each coating as indicated, but not less than that recommended by the coating manufacturer.

Number of coats and film thicknesses required are same regardless of application method.
Ensure edges, corners, crevices, welds, and exposed fasteners receive dry film thickness equivalent to that of flat surfaces.

SURFACES TO BE COATED

General: Paint all exposed surfaces except where indicated not to be painted or where listed in “Surfaces Not to Be Painted” Article in this section.

The term "exposed" includes areas visible through permanent and built-in fixtures when they are in place.
If surface, material, or item is not specifically mentioned, paint in same manner, color, and finish as similar surfaces, materials, or items, regardless of whether indicated or not.
Paint surfaces that are cut and patched including, but not limited to, cutting and patching to permit installation of electrical services, piping, and ductwork.

Exposed Ceilings:

Paint entire exposed ceiling area including, but not limited to, deck, miscellaneous steel, hangers, fasteners, and miscellaneous items and hardware, unless otherwise indicated.
Paint the following mechanical and electrical items unless otherwise indicated:

Insulated piping, pipe hangers, and supports
Ductwork, insulated ducts, and supports.
Conduit, fittings and junction boxes:

Do not paint sprinkler heads and other factory finished fire protection components.

Equipment and Furniture:

Paint surfaces behind movable equipment and furniture the same as similar exposed surfaces.
Paint surfaces to be concealed behind permanently installed fixtures, equipment, and furnishings, using primer only, prior to installation of permanent item.

Registers and Grilles: Paint interior surfaces of ducts, for a minimum of 18 inches or beyond sight line, whichever is greater, with a flat black (non-reflecting) paint.


Access Panels: Paint back sides of access panels and removable or hinged covers to match exposed surfaces.

Doors:

Exterior Doors: Finish doors on tops, bottoms, and all four edges the same as exterior faces.
Interior Doors: Finish doors on tops, bottoms, and all four edges the same as face of non-secured side.

Panelboards for Service Panels, Telephone, and Other Electrical Equipment:

Paint both sides and all edges of plywood before installation.

Color and Finish: Gray, semigloss, unless otherwise indicated.

Mechanical and Electrical:

This Section includes painting of all mechanical, fire protection, and electrical items.

Do not paint sprinkler heads and polished fire protection components.
Do not paint insulated pipe, duct work or equipment before insulation is applied.

Piping, Insulated Piping, Pipe Hangers, and Supports:

In finished/public areas, paint exposed piping the same color and finish as surface it is mounted on unless otherwise indicated.
In utility areas, paint exposed piping according to piping color coding scheme; otherwise paint the same color and finish as surface it is mounted on unless otherwise indicated.
Paint all exposed pipe hangers and supports the same color and finish as surface it is mounted on unless otherwise indicated.

Any portion of hangers and supports encompassing the actual pipe shall be painted to match the pipe color and finish.

Ductwork, Insulated Ducts, and Supports:

In finished/public areas, paint exposed ductwork and supports the same color and finish as surface it is mounted on unless otherwise indicated.
In utility areas, paint exposed ductwork according to color coding scheme; otherwise paint the same color and finish as surface it is mounted on unless otherwise indicated.
Paint all exposed hangers and supports the same color and finish as surface it is mounted on unless otherwise indicated.

Any portion of hangers and supports encompassing the actual ductwork shall be painted to match the ductwork color and finish.

Electrical Conduit, Fittings and Junction Boxes:

In finished/public areas, paint exposed conduit, fittings and junction boxes same color and finish as surface it is mounted on unless otherwise indicated.
In utility areas, paint exposed conduit, fittings and junction boxes according to color coding scheme; otherwise paint the same color and finish as surface it is mounted on unless otherwise indicated.


Mechanical and Electrical Equipment:

Exterior Equipment: Paint all equipment exposed to the weather.

Do not paint factory-finished equipment unless otherwise indicated.

Paint shop-primed mechanical and electrical equipment same color and finish as surface it is mounted on unless otherwise indicated.
Remove unfinished louvers, grilles, covers, and access panels on mechanical and electrical components and paintseparately.
Paint interior surfaces of convector and baseboard heating cabinets to match face panels.

SURFACES TO BE COATED

Do not paint or finish the following unless otherwise indicated:

Factory-finished items; factory-primed items are not considered factory-finished.
Items indicated to receive other finish.
Items indicated to remain naturallyfinished.
Fire rating labels.
Equipment serial number and capacitylabels.
Operating parts of equipment.
Aluminum components.
Polished and brushed stainless steel items.
Metal flashings.
Brick.
Decorative concrete masonry units.
Cast-in-place concrete.
Floors.
Surfaces concealed by suspended ceilings.
Concealed piping, ductwork, andconduit.
Surfaces within pipe and duct spaces.
Acoustical materials.

IDENTIFICATION AND COLOR CODING

Marking Fire and Smoke Assemblies.

Permanently identify both sides of each fire and smoke assembly indicated on Drawings.

Labeling:

Labeling may be either painted stencils or preprinted self-adhesive stickers.
Lettering not less than 3 inches in height, minimum 3/8 inch stroke width, in contrasting color to wall. Example of wording as follows:

"2 HOUR FIRE BARRIER - PROTECT ALL OPENINGS" or similar.

Colors and exact wording of labels shall comply with local code(s).


Locations:

Locate labels within 15 feet of the ends of each wall and intervals not to exceed 30 feet measured horizontally along the wall. Minimum of one label per run of wall.

Locate approximately 12 to 24 inches below ceiling/roof deck unless otherwise required by local code(s).
In occupied areas without ceilings do not apply labels.

Where multiple ratings occur in single run of wall:

Apply vertical stripe 2 inches wide and approximately 12 inches high where rating change occurs; use contrasting color to wall.
In occupied areas without ceilings do not apply.
Comply with local code(s).

Mechanical and Electrical Identification and Color Coding:

Refer to Divisions 21, 22, 23, and 26 for color coding scheme and identification of mechanical and electrical services; if no identification is provided, paint as follows:

Color Coding Scheme and Identification:

Piping: None; paint to match surface on which it is mounted.
Ductwork: None; paint to match surface on which it is mounted.
Conduit: None; paint to match surface on which it is mounted.

FIELD QUALITY CONTROL

Subject to the opinion of the Architect, coatings shall be rejected and considered unacceptable for any of the following reasons:

Lacking minimum dry film thicknesses.
Poor coverage at rivet heads, plate edges, lap joints, crevices, pockets, and corners.
Damage from touching, or disturbing coatings in any other manner, before sufficiently dry.
Damage from application to moist surfaces or damage caused by inadequate protection from the weather.
Damage or contamination of coatings from blown contaminants including, but not limited to, dust.
Coatings shall be rejected if any of the following are evident under natural lighting for exterior surfaces and final lighting source, including daylighting, for interior surfaces:

Visible defects are evident on vertical surfaces when viewed at normal viewing angles from a distance of not less than 48 inches.
Visible defects are evident on horizontal surfaces when viewed at normal viewing angles from a distance of not less than 48 inches.
Visible defects are evident on ceiling, soffit and other overhead surfaces when viewed at normal viewing angles from a distance of not less than 48 inches.

Visible defects are defined as follows:

Brush and roller marks, streaks, laps, runs, sags, drips, heavy stippling, hiding or shadowing by inefficient application methods, skipped or missed areas, and foreign materials in paint coatings.
When the final coat on any surface exhibits a lack of uniformity of color, finish, texture, and hiding across full surface area.


Rejected coatings shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the Contractor.

Small affected areas shall be touched up.
Large affected areas shall be repainted.
Small and large areas shall be as defined by the Architect.
Areas without sufficient dry film thickness shall be repainted.
Paint runs and sags shall be removed by scraper or sanding and repainted.

CLEANING AND PROTECTION

At end of each workday, remove rubbish, empty cans, rags, and other discarded materials from Project site.

Do not clean equipment with free-draining water. Prevent solvents, thinners, cleaners, and other contaminants from entering waterways, sanitary and storm drain systems, and ground.
Dispose of contaminants in accordance with requirements of authorities having jurisdiction.
Allow empty paint cans to dry before disposal.

After completing coating application, clean spattered surfaces. Remove spattered paints by washing, scraping, or other methods. Do not scratch or damage adjacent finished surfaces.

Protect work of other trades against damage from coating application. Correct damage to work of other trades by cleaning, repairing, replacing, and refinishing, as approved by Architect, and leave in an undamaged condition.

At completion of construction activities of other trades, touch up and restore damaged or defaced coatings surfaces.


END OF SECTION 09 9600


SECTION 20 0500 – COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR MECHANICAL

PART 1 - GENERAL

1.1

RELATED DOCUMENTS

A.
Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including Division 00 Bidding and Contracting Requirements, and Division 01 General Requirements Specification Sections, apply to this Section.
1.2

SUMMARY

A.
This Section includes the following:

References
Quality Assurance
System Description
Permits and Fees
Examination of Drawings and Premises
Substitutions
Work Under Other Contracts
Submittals
Work Restrictions, Coordination, Sequencing and Scheduling
Conflicting Requirements and Minor Changes in the Work
Delivery, Storage and Handling
Basic Electrical Requirements and Methods
Interoperability
Warranties
Mechanical Equipment -General
Sealing of Openings (Firestopping)
Examination of Existing Conditions and Temporary Services
Mechanical Demolition Work
Cutting and Patching
Protection of Installed Construction, Damage to Other Work and Corrections
Chases and Recesses
Concrete Work, Equipment Foundations and Supports
Coordination with Other Trades
Assembly of Equipment, Equipment Connections, Installation and Lubrication
Touch-up Painting
Scaffolding, Rigging, Hoisting, Excavation and Backfilling
Accessibility and Access Panels
Field Quality Control, Starting, Adjusting and Commissioning
Training and Instruction Program
Cleaning and Waste Management

REFERENCES

The mechanical and physical properties of all materials, and the design, performance characteristics, and methods of construction of all items of equipment, shall be in accordance with the latest issue of the various, applicable Standard Specifications of the following recognized authorities:

AABC - Associated Air Balance Council
ANSI - American National Standards Institute
ASHRAE - American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Engineers
ASTM - American Society for Testing Materials
NEC - National Electrical Code
NFPA - National Fire Protection Association
NEMA - National Electrical Manufacturer’s Association
SMACNA - Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors National Association
UL - Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc.


QUALITY ASSURANCE

General: Qualifications paragraphs in this Article establish some of the minimum qualification levels required; Division 01 and individual Specification Sections specify additional requirements.

Code Compliance: Work and equipment shall comply with all latest applicable codes and legislations.

Regulatory Requirements:

Ordinances and Codes: Perform all work in accordance with applicable Federal, State and local ordinances and regulations, the Rules and Regulations of ASHRAE, NFPA, SMACNA and UL, unless otherwise indicated.

Notify the Architect/Engineer before submitting his proposal should any changes in Drawings or Specifications be required to conform to the above codes, rules or regulations. After entering into Contract, make all changes required to conform to above ordinances, rules and regulations without additional expense to the Owner.
Barrier-Free Regulations: Comply with the requirements of the State of Michigan Handicapped Barrier-Free Regulations and with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).

Factory-Authorized Service Representative Qualifications: An authorized representative of manufacturer who is trained and approved by manufacturer to inspect installation of manufacturer's products that are similar in material, design, and extent to those required for this Project.

Instructor Qualifications: A factory-authorized service representative, complying with requirements in "Quality Requirements," experienced in operation and maintenance procedures and training.

Tests and inspections not explicitly assigned to Owner are Contractor's responsibility. Unless otherwise indicated, provide quality-control services specified and those required by authorities having jurisdiction. Perform quality-control services required of Contractor by authorities having jurisdiction, whether specified or not.

Where services are indicated as Contractor's responsibility, engage a qualified testing agency to perform these quality-control services.

Contractor shall not employ same entity engaged by Owner, unless agreed to in writing by Owner.

Testing and inspecting requested by Contractor and not required by the Contract Documents are Contractor's responsibility.
Submit additional copies of each written report directly to authorities having jurisdiction, when they so direct.

Manufacturer's Field Services: Where indicated, engage a factory-authorized service representative to inspect field-assembled components and equipment installation, including service connections.

Retesting/Reinspecting: Regardless of whether original tests or inspections were Contractor's responsibility, provide quality-control services, including retesting and reinspecting, for construction that replaced Work that failed to comply with the Contract Documents.

Associated Services: Cooperate with agencies performing required commissioning, tests, inspections, and similar quality-control services, and provide reasonable auxiliary services as requested. Notify agency sufficiently in advance of operations to permit assignment of personnel. Provide the following:

Access to the Work.
Incidental labor and facilities necessary to facilitate tests and inspections.


Adequate quantities of representative samples of materials that require testing and inspecting. Assist agency in obtaining samples.
Facilities for storage and field curing of test samples.
Delivery of samples to testing agencies.
Preliminary design mix proposed for use for material mixes that require control by testing agency.
Security and protection for samples and for testing and inspecting equipment at Project site.

Coordination: Coordinate sequence of activities to accommodate required quality-assurance and control services with a minimum of delay and to avoid necessity of removing and replacing construction to accommodate testing and inspecting.

Schedule times for tests, inspections, obtaining samples, and similar activities.

Compatibility of Options: If Contractor is given option of selecting between two or more products for use on Project, product selected shall be compatible with products previously selected, even if previously selected products were also options.

Each contractor is responsible for providing products and construction methods compatible with products and construction methods of other contractors.
If a dispute arises between contractors over concurrently selectable but incompatible products, Architect/Engineer will determine which products shall be used at no additional cost to the project.

Acceptance of Work: Failure on the part of the A/E to reject shop drawings or to reject Work in progress shall not be interpreted as acceptance of Work not in conformance with Code, Legislation, the Drawings and/or Specifications. Correct Work not in conformance whenever non-conformance is discovered.

SYSTEM DESCRIPTION

Design Requirements: Furnish all labor, materials, equipment, technical supervision, and incidental services required to complete, test and leave ready for operation the mechanical systems as specified in the Division 20, 21, 22 and 23 Sections and as indicated on Drawings.

The Mechanical Drawings indicate the general design and extent of all equipment, piping and ductwork. Comply with the Drawings as closely as actual construction of the building and the work of other trades permit.

PERMITS AND FEES

Give all necessary notices, obtain all permits; pay all government and state sales taxes and fees where applicable, and other costs, including utility connections or extensions in connection with the Project scope of work and expenses for permits, licenses, tests and inspections. File all necessary drawings, prepare all documents and obtain all necessary approvals of all governmental and state departments having jurisdiction, obtain all required certificates of inspections for Project scope of work and deliver a copy to the Architect/Engineer before request for acceptance and final payment for the Project scope of work.

Upon completion of the Work, obtain and send certificates of inspections and approvals to the Architect/Engineer.

EXAMINATION OF DRAWINGS AND PREMISES

Before submitting Bids, examine the architectural, electrical and other trades’ drawings and specifications.

Notify Architect/Engineer should any discrepancies occur between them and the mechanical work.
No additional charges will be allowed because of failure to make this examination, or to include all materials and labor required for the Work.


Before submitting Bids, examine the premises to determine existing conditions for performing the Work. No additional charges will be allowed because of failure to make this examination or to include all materials and labor to complete the Work.
The Architectural Drawings take precedence in all matters pertaining to the building structure, Mechanical drawings in all matters pertaining to Mechanical trades and Electrical drawings in all matters pertaining to Electrical trades installation. However, where there are conflicts or differences between the Drawings for the various trades, report such conflicts or differences to the Architect/Engineer who shall determine the course of action to be taken.

Field Measurements:

Drawings are not intended to be scaled for roughing-in or to serve as shop drawings. Take all field measurements required for fitting the installation to the building.

SUBSTITUTIONS

Base Bid must be in accordance with materials or products specified. Any exceptions to this must be approved in writing by the Architect/Engineer ten (10) days or more prior to bidding.

Voluntary alternates may be submitted for consideration, with listed addition or deduction to the Bid, but will not affect the awarding of the Contract.
Mandatory Alternates: The Contractor shall refer to alternates listed in Division 01 and proposals shall submit price quotations for the alternates that apply to the mechanical work.

WORK UNDER OTHER CONTRACTS

General: Cooperate fully with separate contractors so work on those contracts may be carried out smoothly, without interfering with or delaying work under this Contract. Coordinate the Work of this Contract with work performed under separate contracts.

This Contractor shall be responsible for coordination with piping, equipment, etc., installed in previous Bid Packages. The Contractor shall review the previous bid package drawings and specifications and shall visit the site as part of his/her coordination effort. The Contractor shall also review with the Architect/Engineer, any piping, equipment, and devices that are shown on Bid Package documents but have been purchased and installed under previous bid packages.

SUBMITTALS

General Product Requirements: Provide products that comply with the Contract Documents, that are undamaged and, unless otherwise indicated, that are new at time of installation.

Provide products complete with accessories, trim, finish, fasteners, and other items needed for a complete installation and indicated use and effect.
Standard Products: If available, and unless custom products or nonstandard options are specified, provide standard products of types that have been produced and used successfully in similar situations on other projects.
Owner reserves the right to limit selection to products with warranties not in conflict with requirements of the Contract Documents.
Where products are accompanied by the term "as selected," Architect/Engineer will make selection.
Descriptive, performance, and reference standard requirements in the Specifications establish "salient characteristics" of products.
Or Equal: Where products are specified by name and accompanied by the term "or equal" or "or approved equal" or "or approved," comply with provisions in "Comparable Products" Article to obtain approval for use of an unnamed product.


Product Selection Procedures:

Design Basis: The design has been based on the single manufacturer indicated in the contract documents. The Contractor is responsible for verifying prior to submission, that any other manufacturer even though listed complies with dimensional and performance characteristics of the base specified product. Modifications shall be made by the Contractor as part of this contract to accommodate changes to the design basis.
Product: Where Specifications name a single product and manufacturer, provide the named product that complies with requirements.
Manufacturers: Where Specifications include a list of manufacturers' names, provide a product by one of the manufacturers listed that complies with requirements.
Substitutions: Not allowed.

Comparable Product: Product that is demonstrated and approved through submittal process to have the indicated qualities related to type, function, dimension, in-service performance, physical properties, appearance, and other characteristics that equal or exceed those of specified product.

Conditions for Consideration: Architect/Engineer will consider Contractor's request for comparable product when the following conditions are satisfied. If the following conditions are not satisfied, Architect/Engineer may return requests without action, except to record noncompliance with these requirements:

Evidence that the proposed product does not require revisions to the Contract Documents, that it is consistent with the Contract Documents and will produce the indicated results, and that it is compatible with other portions of the Work.
Detailed comparison of significant qualities of proposed product with those named in the Specifications. Significant qualities include attributes such as performance, weight, size, durability, visual effect, and specific features and requirements indicated.
Evidence that proposed product provides specified warranty.
List of similar installations for completed projects with project names and addresses and names and addresses of Architect/Engineers and owners, if requested.
Samples, if requested.

Product List: Submit a list, in tabular from, showing specified products. Include generic names of products required. Include manufacturer's name and proprietary product names for each product.

Initial Submittal: Within 30 days after date of commencement of the Work, submit 3 copies of initial product list. Include a written explanation for omissions of data and for variations from Contract requirements.

Delegated-Design Services:

Performance and Design Criteria: Where professional design services or certifications by a design professional are specifically required of the Contractor by the Contract Documents, the Contractor shall provide products and systems complying with specific performance and design indicated.

If criteria indicated are not sufficient to perform services or certification required, submit a written request for additional information to the Architect.
Delegated-Design Services Certification: In addition to Shop Drawings, Product Data, and other required submittals, submit digitally signed PDF electronic file copies of certificate, signed and sealed by the responsible design professional registered in the State where the project is located, for each product and system specifically assigned to the Contractor to be designed or certified by a design professional.

Indicate that products and systems comply with performance and design criteria in the Contract Documents. Include list of codes, loads, and other factors used in performing these services.


Submittal Requirements:

The following is in addition to the requirements for submittals in Division 01
Material List: Submit a complete list of all materials and equipment, and their manufacturers, for approval by the Architect/Engineer within 15 days after award of contract and prior to submittal of shop drawings.
All equipment of the same or similar systems shall be by the same manufacturer
Shop Drawings: Prepare shop drawings drawn to scale and submit to the Architect/Engineer for review, following submittal requirements listed in Division 01 and as required by the General Conditions. After the shop drawings are reviewed, they will be stamped and returned for distribution.
Preparation: Fully illustrate requirements in the Contract Documents. Include the following information, as applicable:

Identification of products.
Schedules.
Compliance with specified standards.
Notation of coordination requirements.
Notation of dimensions established by field measurement.
Relationship and attachment to adjoining construction clearly indicated.
Seal and signature of professional Architect/Engineer if specified.

Submit shop drawings of all sheet metal ductwork with necessary sections, details, dimensions, etc.

All sheet metal shop drawings shall bear balance agency approval stamp prior to submittal to Architect/Engineer.

Submit shop drawings and product data for all equipment, materials, valves, plumbing and heating specialties, pipe hangers, wiring diagrams and control diagrams including but not limited to items indicated below.
No apparatus or equipment shall be shipped from stock or fabricated until shop drawings for them have been reviewed by the Architect/Engineer. By the review of shop drawings, the Architect/Engineer does not assume responsibility for actual dimensions or for the fit of completed work in position, nor does such review relieve Mechanical Trades of full responsibility for the proper and correct execution of the work required.
Submit shop drawing with all pertinent data and with identification mark number or symbol numbers as specified or scheduled on the Mechanical Drawings.
Shop drawings shall be reviewed by the Mechanical Contractor for completeness and accuracy prior to submitting to the Architect/Engineer for review. The shop drawings shall be dated and signed by the Mechanical Contractor prior to submission.
Where the shop drawings consist of manufacturer's standard detail drawing or schedules and contain data for a variety of similar equipment, indicate the data pertinent to the equipment furnished for this project only. Standard detail drawings and schedules not clearly indicating which data is associated with this Project shall be returned "Rejected”.
Where accessories and/or options are specified and do not appear as part of manufacturer's standard detail drawings, state each accessory that is to be provided with the equipment on the standard detail drawings.
Partial submittals for equipment will not be permitted. Where partial submittals are transmitted to the Architect/Engineer, they will be returned "Rejected”.
Plumbing fixture submittals shall be submitted as one (1) package including all fixtures intended to be used for this Project.
Submittal Preparation: Shop drawing shall be submitted using the IDS “Submittal Form”. Provide one (1) form for each project manual section number. The mechanical contractor shall fill out each submittal following the instructions printed on the back of the submittal form.
Submit manufacturer’s submittals on all major mechanical systems and/or equipment, including but not limited to all equipment scheduled on drawings and all equipment in all division 20, 21, 22 and 23 specifications.


WORK RESTRICTIONS, COORDINATION, SEQUENCING AND SCHEDULING

Existing Utility Interruptions: Do not interrupt utilities serving facilities occupied by Owner or others unless permitted under the following conditions and then only after arranging to provide temporary utility services:

Notify Owner and Architect/Engineer not less than 10 days in advance of proposed utility interruptions.
Do not proceed with utility interruptions without Owner's and Architect/Engineer's written permission.

Coordination: Each Contractor shall coordinate its construction operations with those of other Contractors and entities to ensure efficient and orderly installation of each part of the Work. Each Contractor shall coordinate its operations with operations, included in different Sections that depend on each other for proper installation, connection, and operation.

Schedule construction operations in sequence required to obtain the best results where installation of one part of the Work depends on installation of other components, before or after its own installation.
Coordinate installation of different components with other Contractors to ensure maximum performance and accessibility for required maintenance, service, and repair.
Make adequate provisions to accommodate items scheduled for later installation.

Contractor shall coordinate all final specific utility requirements.

Performance Requirements: Perform all work in a first class and workmanlike manner, in accordance with the latest accepted standards and practices for the Trades involved.

Sequence and schedule work to avoid interference with the work of other Trades. Be responsible for removing and relocating any work which in the opinion of the Owner's Representatives causes interference.

Coordinate mechanical equipment installation with other building components.

Arrange for pipe spaces, chases, slots, and openings in building structure during progress of construction to allow for mechanical installations.

Coordinate installation of required supporting devices and set sleeves in poured-in-place concrete and other structural components, as they are constructed.

Sequence, coordinate, and integrate installations of mechanical materials and equipment for efficient flow of the Work. Coordinate installation of large equipment requiring positioning before closing in building.

Coordinate connection of mechanical systems with exterior underground and overhead utilities and services. Comply with requirements of governing regulations, franchised service companies, and controlling agencies.

Coordinate requirements for access panels and doors if mechanical items requiring access are concealed behind finished surfaces. Access panels and doors are specified in Section 08 3113 “Access Doors and Frames.”

Coordinate installation of identifying devices after completing covering and painting, if devices are applied to surfaces. Install identifying devices before installing acoustical ceilings and similar concealment.

Action may include a request for additional information, in which case time for response will date from time of receipt of additional information.


CONFLICTING REQUIREMENTS AND MINOR CHANGES IN THE WORK

General: If compliance with two or more standards or directives is specified and the standards establish different or conflicting requirements for minimum quantities or quality levels, comply with the most stringent requirement. Refer to uncertainties and requirements that are different, but apparently equal, to Architect/Engineer for a decision before proceeding.

Minimum Quantity or Quality Levels: The quantity or quality level shown or specified shall be the minimum provided or performed. The actual installation may comply exactly with the minimum quantity or quality specified, or it may exceed the minimum within reasonable limits. To comply with these requirements, indicated numeric values are minimum or maximum, as appropriate, for the context of requirements. Refer uncertainties to Architect/Engineer for a decision before proceeding.

Architect/Engineer will issue supplemental instructions authorizing minor changes in the Work, not involving adjustment to the Contract Sum or the Contract Time.

Drawings are diagrammatic, the Contractor shall relocate devices a reasonable distance for coordination.

A reasonable distance is 15 feet at no additional cost.

DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING

Deliver, store, and handle products using means and methods that will prevent damage, deterioration, and loss, including theft. Comply with manufacturer's written instructions and generally accepted construction practice.

Storage and Protection: Provide adequate storage space for all mechanical equipment and materials delivered to the job site under a weather protected enclosure. Location of the space will be designated by the Owner’s Representative. Equipment set in place in unprotected areas must be provided with temporary protection.

Storage:

Store products to allow for inspection and measurement of quantity or counting of units.
Store materials in a manner that will not endanger Project structure.
Store products that are subject to damage by the elements, under cover in a weathertight enclosure above ground, with ventilation adequate to prevent condensation.
Store cementitious products and materials on elevated platforms.
Store foam plastic and plastic piping from exposure to sunlight, except to extent necessary for period of installation and concealment.
Comply with product manufacturer's written instructions for temperature, humidity, ventilation, and weather-protection requirements for storage.
Protect stored products from damage and liquids from freezing.
Provide a secure location and enclosure at Project site for storage of materials and equipment by Owner's construction forces. Coordinate location with Owner.
Be responsible for the care and protection of mechanical equipment until it has been fully tested and accepted.
Protect materials with permanent factory finish from damage by covering.
Protect materials with enamel or glaze surfaces by covering or coating as recommended in “Handling and Care of Enameled Cast Iron Plumbing Fixtures” bulletin, issued by the Plumbing Fixtures Manufacturers Association and as approved.
Coat polished or plated metal parts with white petroleum jelly immediately after installation.
Protect equipment outlets, pipe and duct openings with temporary plugs or caps.
Care and protection of electrical equipment furnished by Mechanical Trades and installed by Electrical Trades shall be the responsibility of the Electrical Trades after receiving equipment from Mechanical.


BASIC ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS AND METHODS

For Electrical Work provided in Division 20, 21, 22 and 23 Sections, furnish UL Listed components, in accordance with Division 26 and applicable NEMA and NEC (ANSI C 1) requirements. Provide wiring, external to electrical enclosures, in conduit. All electrical work provided by this Contractor shall conform to Division 26 requirements.

Changes Involving Electrical Work: The design of the mechanical systems is based on the equipment specified and scheduled on the Drawings.

Where equipment changes are made that involve additional electrical work (larger size motors, additional wiring of equipment, etc.) the Mechanical trades involved shall compensate the electrical trades for the cost of the additional Work required.

Heat-producing or spark-generating electrical devices located within Class I, Division I, Group D areas and Class I, Division II, Group D areas shall bear UL Label rated for the exposure.

For equipment specified in Divisions 20, 21, 22 and 23 and provided with electrical characteristics requirements other than that specified or indicated, include necessary electrical wiring, components and transformer equipment selected to assure maximum efficiency operation.

Provide specialty instrument wiring necessary to operation of a component, assembly or system as part of the work in Divisions 20, 21, 22 and 23.

Coordinate the number of auxiliary N.O. and N.C. contacts to be provided as part of the Work to accommodate equipment and functions specified or indicated as part of the work under these Sections.

Provide electrical work required for the operation of components and assemblies provided as part of the Work in Division 20, 21, 22 and 23 Sections but not specified or indicated as part of the Work in Division 26.

Where “packaged-self-contained” equipment is specified, only one power supply shall be provided to that equipment as a part of the Work under Division 26 Sections, except as otherwise modified or supplemented by the Contract Documents for that item. All other electrical equipment including starters and wiring is part of the Work in Division 26 Sections.

Where “packaged” equipment is specified, one or more power supplies and interconnecting control wiring may be required to provide a complete, operating unit. Any required intercomponent and interassembly power or control wiring shall be provided as part of the Work of Divisions 20, 21, 22 and 23 per the applicable requirements of Division 26.

Mount line voltage (120 VAC) control components specified as part of the Work under Division 20, 21, 22 and 23 Sections for connection as part of the work under Division 26.

Refer to Electrical Drawings and Division 26 for specific information regarding provisions for and arrangement of electrical circuits and components and for interface with Work specified under Divisions 20, 21, 22 and 23.

INTEROPERABILITY

Contractor shall review all Drawings and Specifications from all Mechanical and Electrical disciplines and shall coordinate work as necessary to ensure proper coordination and interoperability of all existing and new, networked or interconnected systems, as indicated. Networked/interconnected systems may include, but are not limited to the following:

DDC controls provided by the Mechanical Systems Controls Contractor
Packaged mechanical unit controls provided by the unit Manufacturer


Lighting controls provided by the Electrical Contractor
Fire Alarm systems provided by the Electrical Contractor
Audio/Visual systems provided by the Electrical Contractor
Security systems provided by the Electrical Contractor
Site central Operator Interface system

WARRANTIES

Warranty: Warranty the mechanical installation to be free from defects and replace or repair, to the satisfaction of the Owner, any part of the mechanical installation which may fail within a period of one year after substantial completion, provided that such failure is due to defects in materials or workmanship or to failure to follow the Contract Documents.

File with the Owner any and all warranties from equipment manufacturers and what operating conditions and performance capacities they are based on. Refer to Division 01 Sections.
During this warranty period, correct or replace all defects developing through materials or workmanship immediately as directed by the Architect/Engineer without expense to the Owner; make all such repairs or replacements to the Owner’s satisfaction

Warranties specified in other Sections shall be in addition to, and run concurrent with, other warranties required by the Contract Documents. Manufacturer's disclaimers and limitations on product warranties do not relieve Contractor of obligations under requirements of the Contract Documents.

Warranty Start Date: Date of substantial completion.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT – GENERAL

All major items of equipment shall be furnished complete with all accessories normally supplied with the catalog items listed and all other accessories necessary for a complete and satisfactory operating system. All equipment and materials shall be new and shall be standard products of manufacturers regularly engaged in the production of plumbing, heating, ventilating and air conditioning equipment and shall be the manufacturer’s latest design.

SEALING OF OPENINGS (FIRESTOPPING)

Seal openings around pipes in sleeves and around duct openings through walls, floors and ceilings, and where floors, fire rated walls and smoke barriers are penetrated. (Fiberglass is not acceptable.) Fire and/or smoke barriers shall be UL listed fire and smoke stop fittings and shall have fire rating equal to or greater than the penetrated barrier. Refer to Division 07 Section “Firestop Systems” for additional requirements.

Manufacturers:

3M
Hilti
Tremco
Manville


PART 3 - EXECUTION

EXAMINATION OF EXISTING CONDITIONS AND TEMPORARY SERVICES

The existence and location of underground and other utilities and construction indicated as existing are not guaranteed. Before beginning work, investigate and verify the existence and location of underground utilities, mechanical and electrical systems, and other construction affecting the Work.

Before construction, verify the location and invert elevation at points of connection of sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and water-service piping; underground electrical services, and other utility and system connections.
Furnish location data for work related to Project that must be performed by public utilities serving Project site.
Existing Utility Information: Furnish information to local utility and Owner that is necessary to adjust, move, or relocate existing utility structures, utility poles, lines, services, or other utility appurtenances located in or affected by construction. Coordinate with authorities having jurisdiction.

Acceptance of Conditions: Examine substrates, areas, and conditions, for compliance with requirements for installation tolerances and other conditions affecting performance. Record observations.

Written Report: Where a written report listing conditions detrimental to performance of the Project scope of work is required by other Sections, include the following:

Description of the Work.
List of detrimental conditions, including substrates.
List of unacceptable installation tolerances.
Recommended corrections.

Verify compatibility with and suitability of substrates, including compatibility with existing finishes or primers.
Examine roughing-in for mechanical and electrical systems to verify actual locations of connections before equipment and fixture installation.
Examine walls, floors, and roofs for suitable conditions where products and systems are to be installed.
Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected. Proceeding with the Work indicates acceptance of surfaces and conditions.

Field Measurements: Take field measurements as required to fit the Work properly. Recheck measurements before installing each product. Where portions of the Work are indicated to fit to other construction, verify dimensions of other construction by field measurements before fabrication. Coordinate fabrication schedule with construction progress to avoid delaying the Work.

Space Requirements: Verify space requirements and dimensions of items shown diagrammatically on Drawings.

Review of Contract Documents and Field Conditions: Immediately on discovery of the need for clarification of the Contract Documents, submit a request for information to Architect/Engineer. Include a detailed description of problem encountered, together with recommendations for changing the Contract Documents.

Provide temporary water and heat service as described in Division 01.

New equipment installed shall not be used for temporary construction use without prior written approval from Owner’s representative.


MECHANICAL DEMOLITION WORK

General: Perform mechanical demolition work in a systematic manner. Use such methods as outlined below to complete Work indicated on Drawings.

Obtain approval from the Owner prior to interrupting existing services. All service interruptions shall be at a time suitable to the Owner. Where the Owner approves service interruptions at times resulting in premium tile work to this Contractor, this Contractor shall include the premium time in his Base Bid.

Remove existing mechanical equipment, components and materials, including but not limited to piping, air handling units, heating units, plumbing fixtures, pumps, supports and other mechanical items made obsolete by the new work.

Where existing equipment is removed, piping shall be capped under floor or behind face of wall.

Work indicated to be removed includes removal of all auxiliary materials, accessories, anchorage, fasteners, and etc., down to bare substrate. No residual materials shall remain from work to be removed. Contractor will use whatever means necessary; including removal of all materials attached or related to those items designated to be removed, as acceptable to Owner and Architect/Engineer, to provided complete and thorough removal of existing work.

Protect existing equipment and installations indicated to remain. If damaged or disturbed in the course of the Work, remove damaged portions and install new products of equal capacity, quality, and functionality.

Work that has been cut or partially removed shall be protected against damage.

Materials salvaged from this work shall not be reused except where reuse is specifically indicated.

Existing fixtures and mechanical equipment removed, not reused and not specifically indicated to be turned over to the Owner shall be legally and properly disposed of off Owner’s property.

Existing fixtures and mechanical equipment specifically indicated to be turned over to the Owner shall be carefully disconnected, removed and turned over to the Owner in a storage area as directed by the Owner.

Accessible Work: Remove exposed equipment and installations, indicated to be demolished, in their entirety.

Abandoned Work: Cut and remove buried MEP system materials, equipment, raceways, piping and distribution, indicated to be abandoned in place, 2 inches below the surface of adjacent construction. Cap and patch surface to match existing finish.

Remove demolished materials from Project site.

Remove, store, clean, reinstall, reconnect, and make operational components indicated for relocation.

Field verify all existing MEP system materials, equipment, raceways, piping and distribution to be removed for exact quantities.

Remove all existing MEP system materials, equipment, raceways, piping and distribution located above ceilings and in walls that are not being reused.

Remove all MEP systems and appurtenances, which are to be removed, in their entireties back to the source or source panels.

Remove all existing MEP system materials, equipment, raceways, piping and distribution located in walls or ceilings being demolished. Abandon no devices that have been disconnected unless specifically noted.


Maintain continuity of all existing MEP devices, and utilization equipment not removed.

Remove, store, protect, and reinstall existing work as required to accommodate alteration indicated.

The existing work to be removed, in general, is as indicated on the Drawings and in this Section, but also includes any materials or work necessary to permit installation of new materials, as approved by Owner and Architect/Engineer.

If systems, equipment, and components to remain is damaged in appearance or is unserviceable, remove damaged or unserviceable portions and replace with new products of equal capacity and quality.

In finished areas, all systems, equipment, and components shall be cut back to a concealed location, i.e., within walls, above ceilings, etc., before capping.

CUTTING AND PATCHING

See Division 01 for additional requirements. The Contractor shall furnish sketches showing the location and sizes of all openings, chases, etc., required for the installation of Work.

Work under this Division shall include furnishing, locating and setting inserts and/or sleeves required before the floors and walls are built or be responsible for cutting, drilling or chopping where sleeves and inserts were not installed, where wall or floors are existing or not correctly located. The Contractor shall do all drilling required for the installation of hangers.

Exercise extreme caution when core drilling or punching openings in concrete floor slabs in order to avoid cutting or damaging structural members. No structural members or structural slabs/floors shall be cut without the written acceptance of the Structural Engineer and all such cutting shall be done in a manner directed by him.

The drilling or punching of structural members, such as holes through beams or columns, shall not be done without the specific permission of the Architect/Engineer.

Cutting of holes through floors and walls shall be done only at such locations as may be directed by the Architect/Engineer.

Cooperate with the other Contractors so that all cutting and repairing in any given area will be done simultaneously.

Cleaning: Clean areas and spaces where cutting and patching are performed. Remove paint, mortar, oils, putty, and similar materials from adjacent finished surfaces.

PROTECTION OF INSTALLED CONSTRUCTION, DAMAGE TO OTHER WORK AND CORRECTIONS

Provide final protection and maintain conditions that ensure installed Work is without damage or deterioration at time of Substantial Completion.

Comply with manufacturer's written instructions for temperature and relative humidity.

Protect all mechanical equipment, ductwork and piping from dust, dirt and debris throughout construction

Remove debris from concealed spaces before enclosing the space.

Remove liquid spills promptly.

Where dust would impair proper execution of the Project scope of work, broom-clean or vacuum the entire work area, as appropriate.


Installed Work: Keep installed work clean.

Exposed Surfaces in Finished Areas: Clean exposed surfaces and protect as necessary to ensure freedom from damage and deterioration at time of Substantial Completion.

During handling and installation, clean and protect construction in progress and adjoining materials already in place. Apply protective covering where required to ensure protection from damage or deterioration at Substantial Completion.

Clean and provide maintenance on completed construction as frequently as necessary through the remainder of the construction period. Adjust and lubricate operable components to ensure operability without damaging effects.

Limiting Exposures: Supervise construction operations to assure that no part of the construction completed or in progress, is subject to harmful, dangerous, damaging, or otherwise deleterious exposure during the construction period.

Mechanical Trades will be responsible for all damage to other Work caused by their Work or through the neglect of their workers.

All patching and repairing of any such damaged Work shall be performed by the trades that installed the Work, but the cost shall be paid by the Mechanical Trades.

The cost of corrective work shall be included under the contract.

Repair or remove and replace defective construction.

Repairing includes replacing defective parts, refinishing damaged surfaces, touching up with matching materials, and properly adjusting operating equipment.

Restore permanent facilities used during construction to their specified or original condition.

Remove and replace damaged surfaces that are exposed to view if surfaces cannot be repaired without visible evidence of repair.

Repair components that do not operate properly. Remove and replace operating components to new condition.

Remove and replace chipped, scratched, and broken glass or reflective surfaces.

CHASES AND RECESSES

Provide sizes and locations of chases and recesses affecting the mechanical work for provision by general trades.

CONCRETE WORK, EQUIPMENT FOUNDATIONS AND SUPPORTS

Concrete bases shall be provided by Architectural Trades, the correct size and location shall be by Mechanical Trades. Mechanical Trades shall furnish and locate anchor bolts and sleeves, for installation by Architectural Trades.

Coordinate with Architectural Trades any concrete work required for the mechanical installation. Concrete work shall include housekeeping pads beneath equipment and vibration isolation bases. Concrete work shall be in conformance with Division 03 Specifications.


Furnish foundations and supports for mechanical equipment and materials as required by codes, as listed hereinafter and shown or noted on the Drawings.

Provide necessary inserts, rod, structural steel frames, brackets, platforms, etc., for equipment suspended from ceilings or walls.

Inserts for equipment support shall be lead shield anchors for small work and expansion shields for large work. Wooden plugs will not be allowed. Do not use metal roof decking and cellular floors for supporting equipment.

COORDINATION WITH OTHER TRADES

Install Work so as to avoid interferences with the Work of other trades. Be responsible for removing and relocating any work that, in the opinion of the Owner’s Representative, causes interferences.

Should construction conditions prevent the installation of mechanical equipment at locations shown on the drawings, minor deviations may be permitted and shall be as directed by the Architect/Engineer and shall be made without additional cost to Owner.

ASSEMBLY OF EQUIPMENT, EQUIPMENT CONNECTIONS, INSTALLATION AND LUBRICATION

The Contract Drawings and Specifications indicate items to be purchased and installed which are noted by a manufacturer's name, catalog number and/or brief description.

The catalog number may not designate all the accessory parts and appurtenances required for the particular use or function.

Arrange with the manufacturer for the purchase of all items required for the complete installation and efficient operation.

Connections to equipment, fixtures, etc., shall be made in accordance with the shop drawings and rough-in measurements furnished by the manufacturers of the particular equipment furnished. Any and all additional connections not shown on the Drawings but called for by the equipment manufacturer's shop drawings or required for the successful operation of the particular equipment furnished shall be installed as part of this Contract at no additional charge to the Owner.

All fittings connecting to equipment on piping 2-1/2 inches and above in size, shall be flanged, standard weight pattern with flat machine face provided with ring gaskets.

All fittings connecting to equipment on piping 2 inches and below in size, shall be made with unions.

All piping connections to pumps and other equipment shall be installed without strain at the pipe connection of the equipment.

When directed, remove the bolts in flanged connections or disconnect piping to demonstrate that piping has been so connected.

Brass couplings shall be used to connect dissimilar metals (such as steel and copper) to prevent electrolytic action.

General: Locate the Work and components of the Work accurately, in correct alignment and elevation, as indicated.

Make vertical work plumb and make horizontal work level.
Where space is limited, install components to maximize space available for maintenance and ease of removal for replacement.
Conceal pipes, ducts, and wiring in finished areas, unless otherwise indicated.


Maintain minimum headroom clearance as indicated by Architect/Engineer in spaces without a suspended ceiling.

Comply with manufacturer's written instructions and recommendations for installing products in applications indicated.

Install products at the time and under conditions that will ensure the best possible results. Maintain conditions required for product performance until Substantial Completion.

Conduct construction operations so no part of the Work is subjected to damaging operations or loading in excess of that expected during normal conditions of occupancy.

Tools and Equipment: Do not use tools or equipment that produces harmful noise levels.

Templates: Obtain and distribute to the parties involved templates for work specified to be factory prepared and field installed. Check Shop Drawings of other work to confirm that adequate provisions are made for locating and installing products to comply with indicated requirements.

Anchors and Fasteners: Provide anchors and fasteners as required to anchor each component securely in place, accurately located and aligned with other portions of the Work.

All equipment and piping not supported from the building structural steel shall not exceed a combined load of 7 psf when supported from the metal deck/slab. Any condition that may exceed this limit shall be reviewed and approved by the Architect/Engineer and Structural Engineer before installation.
Mounting Heights: Where mounting heights are not indicated, mount components at heights directed by Architect/Engineer and/or to allow for proper access.
Allow for building movement, including thermal expansion and contraction.
Coordinate installation of anchorages. Furnish setting drawings, templates, and directions for installing anchorages, including sleeves, concrete inserts, anchor bolts, and items with integral anchors, that are to be embedded in concrete or masonry. Deliver such items to Project site in time for installation.

Hazardous Materials: Use products, cleaners, and installation materials that are not considered hazardous.

Provide all oil for the operation of the equipment until substantial completion. Contractor shall be held responsible for all damage to bearings while the equipment is being operated by him up to the date of acceptance of the equipment. Protect all bearings and shafts during installation and thoroughly grease the steel shafts to prevent corrosion. All motors and other equipment shall be provided with covers as required for proper protection during construction.

TOUCH-UP PAINTING

In general, no painting is required by Mechanical Trades other than touch-up of factory-finished mechanical equipment.

All factory finished mechanical equipment shall be cleaned at completion of the job. Equipment showing rust or mars shall be thoroughly cleaned and sanded, prime coated and touched up with enamel of color to match original finish.

SCAFFOLDING, RIGGING, HOISTING, EXCAVATION AND BACKFILLING

Coordinate with Architectural Trades any concrete work required for the mechanical installation. Concrete work shall include housekeeping pads beneath equipment and vibration isolation bases. Concrete work shall be in conformance with Division 03 Specifications.


The Contractor shall furnish all scaffolding, rigging, hoisting and services necessary for erection and delivery into the premises any equipment and apparatus furnished under this Division. Remove same from premises when no longer required.

It is the responsibility of the Contractor to coordinate sizes, depths, fill and bedding requirements and any other excavation work required under this Division.

Furnish excavating and backfilling to install work specified in the Mechanical Division. Refer to Mechanical Drawings and Division 31 Section “Earthwork” for methods and materials.

Provide all pumping and well pointing required to keep mechanical excavations dry.

ACCESSIBILITY AND ACCESS PANELS

The Contractor shall be responsible for the sufficiency of the size of shafts and chases, the adequate thickness of partitions, and the adequate clearance in double partitions and hung ceilings for the proper installation of the Work.

Locate all equipment which must be serviced, operated or maintained in fully accessible positions. Access doors shall be furnished for accessibility. Minor deviations from the Drawings may be made to allow better accessibility, but changes of magnitude or which involve extra cost shall not be made without the acceptance of the Architect/Engineer.

Locate all equipment which must be serviced, operated or maintained in fully accessible positions. Equipment shall include, but not be limited to: motors, controllers, coil, valves, switchgear, drain points, etc. Access doors shall be furnished if required for better accessibility. Minor deviations from the Drawings may be made to allow better accessibility, but changes of magnitude or which involve extra cost shall not be made without the acceptance of the Architect/Engineer.

Furnish access doors as required to make accessible all valves, controls, coils, motors, air vents, filters, motorized dampers, electrical boxes and other equipment installed by Mechanical trades or as required by Code. Refer to Division 08 for the type of access doors required. Refer to drawings and specifications for the type of access door to be provided at the outside air intake duct.

Access doors in walls, ceilings, floors, etc., shall be field coordinated. It is the responsibility of the Contractor to coordinate and provide information regarding the sizes and quantities of access doors required for his work. The Contractor shall arrange his work in such a manner as to minimize the quantity of access doors required, such as grouping shutoff valves in the same area. Where possible, locate valves in already accessible areas, such as lay-in ceilings, etc.

On a clean set of prints, the Contractor shall mark in red pencil the location of each required access door, including its size and fire rating (if any), and shall submit the print to the Architect/Engineer for review before access doors are purchased or installed.

Upon completion of the Project, the Contractor shall physically demonstrate that all equipment and devices installed have been located and/or provided with adequate access panels for repair, maintenance and/or operation. Any equipment not so furnished shall be relocated or provided with additional access panels by the installing Contractor at no additional cost to the Owner.

FIELD QUALITY CONTROL, STARTING, ADJUSTING AND COMMISSIONING

Tests and Inspection: When the systems are completed, operate equipment as directed by Architect/Engineer. Replace all faulty equipment. Make necessary adjustments before final acceptance.

Perform all tests required by State, City, County and/or other agencies having jurisdiction.
Provide all materials, equipment, etc., and labor required for tests.


Start equipment and operating components to confirm proper operation. Remove malfunctioning units, replace with new units, and retest.

Adjust operating components for proper operation without binding. Adjust equipment for proper operation.

Test each piece of equipment to verify proper operation. Test and adjust controls and safeties. Replace damaged and malfunctioning controls and equipment.

Manufacturer's Field Service: Provide a factory-authorized service representative to inspect field- assembled components and equipment installation, comply with qualification requirements in "Quality Requirements."

Perform the commissioning activities as outlined in the Division 01 Section “Commissioning” and other requirements of the Contract Documents.

Each Contractor shall assign representatives with expertise and authority to act on its behalf and shall schedule them to participate in and perform commissioning process activities including, but not limited to, the following:

Evaluate performance deficiencies identified in test reports and, in collaboration with entity responsible for system and equipment installation, recommend corrective action.
Cooperate with the CxA for resolution of issues recorded in the Issues Log.
Attend commissioning team meetings held on a weekly basis.
Integrate and coordinate commissioning process activities with construction schedule.
Review and accept construction checklists provided by the CxA.
Complete paper or electronic construction checklists as Work is completed and provide to the Commissioning Authority on a weekly basis.
Review and accept commissioning process test procedures provided by the Commissioning Authority.
Complete commissioning process test procedures.

Refer to related information in other sections for additional requirements.

Maintenance Materials: Retain all portable and detachable portions of the installation such as keys, tools, manuals, etc., until the completion of the work and then them over to the Owner and obtain itemized receipt. This receipt shall be attached to the "Final Application" for payment.

TRAINING AND INSTRUCTION PROGRAM

Program Structure: In addition to Division 01 and individual section requirements, develop an instruction program that includes individual training modules for each system and equipment not part of a system.

Training Modules: Develop a learning objective and teaching outline for each module. Include a description of specific skills and knowledge that participant is expected to master. Provide instruction for the following modules.

Basis of System Design and Operational Requirements
Documentation
Emergencies
Adjustments
Troubleshooting
Maintenance
Repairs

Engage qualified instructors to instruct Owner's personnel to adjust, operate, and maintain systems, subsystems, and equipment not part of a system.


Video Record: Training shall be recorded as digital video.

CLEANING AND WASTE MANAGEMENT

Keep premises free from accumulation of waste materials and rubbish. At completion of work remove all rubbish from and about the building and leave the mechanical systems clean and ready for use.

Close and tightly seal all partly used containers and store protected in well-ventilated, fire-safe area at moderate temperature. Deliver to reuse and/or recycle facilities if not removed from site for Contractor’s reuse.

Separate and recycle waste materials in accordance with the Waste Management Plan and to the maximum extent possible.

Separate metal waste, packaging, and all other materials in accordance with the Waste Management Plan and place in designated areas for recycling or reuse.

Check with manufacturer for recycling options. Most manufacturers take back scrap and unused portions for resale or manufacturing into new product.


END OF SECTION 20 0500


SECTION 20 0513 – COMMON MOTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR MECHANICAL PART 1 - GENERAL
RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

Section includes general requirements for single-phase and three-phase, general-purpose, horizontal, small and medium, squirrel-cage induction motors and single-phase, fan/pump-duty, horizontal, small and medium, electronically commutated, permanent magnet (EC) motors for use on ac power systems up to 600 V and installed at equipment manufacturer's factory or shipped separately by equipment manufacturer for field installation.

DEFINITIONS

Factory-Installed Motor: A motor installed by motorized-equipment manufacturer as a component of equipment.

Field-Installed Motor: A motor installed at Project site and not factory installed as an integral component of motorized equipment.

SUBMITTALS

Product Data for Field-Installed Motors: For each type and size of motor, provide nameplate data and ratings; shipping, installed, and operating weights; mounting arrangements; size, type, and location of winding terminations; conduit entry and ground lug locations; and information on coatings or finishes.

Shop Drawings for Field-Installed Motors: Dimensioned plans, elevations, sections, and details, including required clearances and service space around equipment. Include the following:

Each installed unit's type and details.
Complete NEMA nameplate electrical data including design type, insulation, service factor, and efficiency
Diagrams of power and control wiring. Provide schematic wiring diagram for each type of motor and for each control scheme.
Bearing type, L10 life, and seal construction (open, single, or double shielded).
Certification that electronic VFD driven motors comply with NEMA MG-1 Part 31.
Ground ring and ceramic bearing details as applicable

Coordination Drawings: Floor plans showing dimensioned layout, required working clearances, and required area above and around field-installed motors. Show motor layout, mechanical power transfer link, driven load, and relationship between electrical components and adjacent structural and mechanical elements. Show support locations, type of support, and weight on each support. Indicate field measurements.

Test Reports: Written reports from testing procedures outlined in Part 3.

Operation and Maintenance Data: For field-installed motors to include in emergency, operation, and maintenance manuals.


QUALITY ASSURANCE

Reference Standards: Products in this section shall be built, tested, and installed in compliance with the following quality assurance standards; latest editions, unless noted otherwise:

NFPA 70: National Electrical Code.
NEMA Standards Publication MG 1 (2011): Motors and Generators.
ABMA 9: American Bearings Manufacturers Association, Load Ratings and Fatigue Life for Ball Bearings
UL 1004: Motors, Electric

Testing Agency Qualifications: An independent testing agency, acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction, with the experience and capability to conduct the testing indicated, as documented according to ASTM E 548.

Source Limitations: Obtain field-installed motors of a single type through one source from a single manufacturer.

Product Options for Field-Installed Motors: Drawings indicate size, profiles, and dimensional requirements of motors and are based on the specific system indicated.

Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, Article 100, by a testing agency acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction, and marked for intended use.

Comply with NFPA 70.

COORDINATION

Coordinate features of motors, installed units, and accessory devices. Provide motors that are:

Compatible with the following:

Motor controllers
Magnetic controllers
Multispeed controllers
Reduced-voltage controllers

Designed and labeled for use with variable frequency drives as applicable, and suitable for use throughout speed range without overheating.
Matched to torque and horsepower requirements of the load.
Matched to ratings and characteristics of supply circuit and required control sequence.
Ambient and environmental conditions of installation location

Coordinate motor support with requirements for driven load; access for maintenance and motor replacement; installation of accessories, belts, belt guards; and adjustment of sliding rails for belt tensioning.

Coordinate size and location of concrete bases. Cast anchor-bolt inserts into bases.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

MANUFACTURERS

Provide products of the following manufacturers:

Reliance Electric
Baldor Electric Company
General Electric


U. S. Electric Motors
Marathon Electric
Toshiba Corp

MOTOR GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

Comply with NEMA MG 1 unless otherwise indicated.

Motor requirements apply to factory-installed and field-installed motors except as follows:

Different ratings, performance, or characteristics for a motor are specified in another Section.
Manufacturer for a factory-installed motor requires ratings, performance, or characteristics, other than those specified in this Section, to meet performance specified.
Motor Connections: Multiple power connections not allowed.

Motors Less Than 1/2 HP: Single-phase

Motors 1/2 HP and Larger: Three-phase.

Frequency Rating: 60 Hz, alternating current.

Voltage rating of motor shall be determined by voltage of circuit to which motor is connected:

120 V Circuit: 115 V motor rating.
208 V Circuit: 200 V motor rating.
240 V Circuit: 230 V motor rating.
480 V Circuit: 460 V motor rating.

Service Factor: 1.15 for open drip-proof motors; 1.0 for totally enclosed motors and inverter duty motors.

Duty: Continuous duty at ambient temperature of 105 deg F and at altitude of 3,300 feet above sea level.

Capacity and Torque Characteristics: Sufficient to start, accelerate, and operate connected loads at designated speeds, at installed altitude and environment, with indicated operating sequence, and without exceeding nameplate ratings or considering service factor.

Motors shall be NEMA Design B.

Provide Class B insulation, unless noted otherwise.

All disconnects and other electrical accessories shall comply with Division 26 requirements

Motors shall be nominal 1,800 rpm, unless noted otherwise.

SINGLE-PHASE MOTORS

Multispeed Motors: Variable-torque, permanent-split-capacitor type.

Use shaded pole motors only for motors smaller than 1/20 HP.

Provide automatic reset type thermal over-load protection.

Bearings: Sealed or regreasable ball or sleeve bearings, suitable for the radial and thrust loading of the application.


Furnish with sliding base/slotted mounting holes adequate for proper belt tensioning and alignment of motor or motor/load.

Nameplates may be printed-type glued to the motor.

SINGLE-PHASE EC MOTORS

Motors equal to or smaller than 1 HP shall be Electronically Commutated (EC) type, to suit starting torque and requirements of specific motor applications.

Bearings: Pre-lubricated, antifriction ball bearings suitable for radial and thrust loading.

Motors: Internal motor circuitry shall convert AC power supplied to the fan to DC power to operate the motor. Motor shall be speed controllable down to 20 percent of full speed (80 percent turndown). Motor shall be a minimum of 85 percent efficient at all speeds.

Variable speed, 0 - 2,000 RPM.
Adjustable delay profile.
0 - 10 volt input signal.
Output signal.
Programmable ramp rate.
Soft start.
Remote controller.
Moisture resistant.
Insulation: Class H.
Enclosure: Class 2, IP44.
Integrated motor protection (electronically protected).
UL 778, 1004-1, 508C.
CAN/CSA C22.2 #108, #100, #107.1.
EMC (89/366 EEC): EN 61000.
LVD (73/23/EC): EN 60335-1, EN 60335-2-51.
Machine Safety (98/37/EC): EN ISO 12100.

THREE-PHASE MOTORS

Description: NEMA MG 1, Design B, medium induction motor

Enclosure: Open Drip Proof (ODP) unless noted otherwise in equipment specifications or schedules, and as suitable for service and application.

Motor Efficiency: Nominal (nameplate) full load efficiency and corresponding minimum efficiency shall be equal to or greater than that stated in NEMA MG-1 (2011) Table 12-12 – Full Load Efficiencies of 60hz NEMA Premium Efficient Electric Motors - 600 volts or Less.

“Premium Efficient” for all motors 1 hp and larger, including those furnished as part of equipment specified in equipment sections. The Contractor shall confirm utility company minimum requirements for incentive programs and provide motors with efficiencies that meet or exceed the most stringent between NEMA MG-1 and utility company incentive program requirements. The Contractor, at no extra charge to the Owner, shall replace any motor that does not meet the utility company’s incentive program. The efficiency and/or “NEMA Premium Efficiency” shall be displayed on the motor nameplate and clearly indicated on the equipment shop drawings submitted for approval.


Motors less than 3 HP: Steel or cast iron motor frames, cast aluminum, cast iron, or steel end plates, steel or cast iron terminal box, copper windings. Motor nameplates shall be steel, engraved-type, riveted to motor.

Bearings: Regreasable with relief plugs, pre-lubricated ball bearings suitable for radial and thrust loading of the application, with grease fittings, selected for a minimum L-10 bearing life of 26,280 hours, for belted and direct drive.

Motors 3 HP and above: cast iron motor frame and mounting feet, cast iron end plates (bells), steel or cast iron terminal box, copper windings. Motor nameplates shall be stainless steel engraved type, riveted to the motor.

Bearings shall be regreasable with relief plugs, pre-lubricated ball bearings suitable for radial and thrust loading of the application, with grease fittings. Rated for an L-10 life of 40,000 hours (belted) or 130,000 hours (direct connected).

Bearing life calculations shall be per ABMA 9, and for belted applications shall be based on the maximum external side load limits for belted applications per NEMA MG-1 Table 14-1A. L-10 life calculations for vertical motors and horizontal motors mounted in the vertical position shall consider the application’s thrust loading.

TEFC motors shall also include an external shaft slinger on drive end.

Multispeed Motors: Variable torque.

Separate windings shall be provided for each speed

Stator: Copper windings.

Rotor: Random-wound, squirrel cage.

Temperature Rise: Match insulation rating.

Insulation: Class F.

Code Letter Designation:

Motors 15 HP and Larger: NEMA starting Code F or Code G.
Motors Smaller than 15 HP: Manufacturer's standard starting characteristic.

Motors shall not exceed dBA levels listed in NEMA MG-1 54 PART 9 Tables 9-1 and 9-3, at all speeds.

Motors shall be suitable for continuous duty at rated horsepower, with a maximum hot spot temperature that does not exceed the temperature limit of the insulation, when operated in an ambient temperature of 40 degrees C, except as otherwise indicated.

Direct connected motors shall be furnished with adjustable base. Motors connected to driven equipment by belt or shaft shall be furnished with adjustable NEMA foundation sliding bases.

Motors Used with Reduced-Voltage and Multispeed Controllers: Match wiring connection requirements for controller with required motor leads. Provide terminals in motor terminal box, suited to control method.


For motors used with variable frequency drives, provide General Purpose NEMA Premium Efficiency Class motors complying with NEMA MG-1 Part 30 with windings that meet the requirements of NEMA MG-1 Part
31.4.4.2 and with minimum insulation of Class F.

For all PWM VFD driven motors up to 100 HP: Provide a maintenance free, circumferential conductive micro fiber grounding ring installed on the AC motor to discharge shaft currents to ground. Grounding ring shall be AEGIS SGR (Shaft Grounding Ring).
For all PWM VFD driven motors 100 HP and larger: Provide a maintenance free, circumferential conductive micro fiber grounding ring installed on the drive end of the AC motor to discharge shaft currents to ground. Grounding ring shall be AEGIS SGR (Shaft Grounding Ring). In addition, all VFD driven motors 100 HP and larger shall utilize an insulated ceramic bearing assembly on the non-drive end of the motor, in conformance with the AEGIS installation requirements.
Motors protected by the AEGIS SGR shall be warranted for the term of the manufacturer's motor warranty from induced bearing current damage.

Explosion Proof motors:

UL listed for application or duty.
Motors shall conform to requirements defined in Article 500, 501, 502, and 503 of the National Electric Code.
Motor nameplate shall be specifically marked "explosion proof.”
Sound power levels shall not exceed recommendations of NEMA MG-1 PART 9 Tables 9-1 and 9-3, at all speeds.

PART 3 - EXECUTION

EXAMINATION

Examine areas to receive field-installed motors for compliance with requirements, installation tolerances, and other conditions affecting performance.

Examine roughing-in of conduit systems to verify actual locations of conduit connections before motor installation.

Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected.

MOTOR INSTALLATION

Anchor each motor assembly to base, adjustable rails, or other support, arranged and sized according to manufacturer's written instructions. Attach by bolting. Level and align with load transfer link.

Install motors on concrete bases

Comply with mounting and anchoring requirements specified in Section 20 0548 "Vibration Controls for Mechanical."

FIELD QUALITY CONTROL

Prepare for acceptance tests as follows:

Run each motor with its controller. Demonstrate correct rotation, alignment, and speed at motor design load.
Test interlocks and control features for proper operation.
Verify that current in each phase is within nameplate rating.


Testing: Owner shall engage a qualified testing agency to perform the following field quality-control testing should the proper performance of the motor be in question. If motor performance is found to be deficient, Contractor shall replace motor at no cost to Owner.

Perform each electrical test and visual and mechanical inspection stated in NETA ATS, Section 7.15.1. Certify compliance with test parameters.
Correct malfunctioning units on-site, where possible, and retest to demonstrate compliance; otherwise, replace with new units and retest.

ADJUSTING

Align motors, bases, shafts, pulleys and belts. Tension belts according to manufacturer's written instructions.

Verify that bearings are factory lubricated before starting motors. Lubricate per manufacturer’s instructions. Do not over-lubricate bearings.

Check motors for unusual heating, noise, or excess vibration during operation. Correct any such deficiencies.

Any motors with vibration exceeding specified limits, as noted in the Testing, Adjusting and Balancing Section, or manufacturer's recommendations, whichever is more stringent, shall be corrected, at no cost to Owner, until reduced below those limits.

MOTOR CLEANING

After completing equipment installation, inspect unit components. Remove paint splatters and other spots, dirt, and debris. Repair damaged finish to match original finish.

Clean motors, on completion of installation, according to manufacturer's written instructions.

MOTORS USED WITH VARIABLE FREQUENCY DRIVES

Install shaft grounding rings on all equipment motors using variable speed drives.

Install per manufacturer's instructions.

Assure grounding of SGR to motor frame.


END OF SECTION 20 0513


SECTION 20 0514 – VARIABLE SPEED DRIVES

PART 1 - GENERAL

1.1

RELATED DOCUMENTS

A.
Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.
1.2

SUMMARY

A.
Section includes separately enclosed, preassembled, electronic variable frequency drives (VFDs), rated 600 V and less, for speed control of three-phase, squirrel-cage induction motors.

B.
Provide VFDs meeting the requirements contained herein and as indicated in the equipment schedule.
1.3

QUALITY ASSURANCE

A.
VFD and options shall comply with NFPA 70 (National Electrical Code), IEEE 519, UL 508 and FCC compliance for Radio Frequency Interference (RFI) and Electro- Mechanical Interference (EMI).
1.4

QUALIFICATIONS OF MANUFACTURERS

A.
Furnish essentially standard products of manufacturers regularly engaged in the production of such equipment for a minimum of ten (10) years.
1.5

SOURCE QUALITY CONTROL

A.
The integrated circuits shall undergo a 24-hour "burn-in" to test reliability. During the "burn-in", the temperature shall be cycled between 0 and 70 deg C with the speed varied from 10% to 100% of rated speed.

B.
Perform and record all normal factory tests on subassemblies and total assembly. Notify the Owner of the time of tests and extend reasonable cooperation to them or their representatives to permit them to witness tests should they so request before approval for shipment.
1.6

HARMONIC DISTORTION

A.
The VFD manufacturer shall provide all necessary filters as required to ensure compliance with IEEE Standard 519 “Recommended Practices and Requirements for Harmonic Control in Electrical Power Systems.”
1.7

SUBMITTAL DATA

A.
Submit for approval, the following product data:


Dimensions and elevations.
Front and side working spaces shall meet NEC requirements.
Complete product data listing all included features.
Factory test reports.
The electrical rating for each VFD, matched to each piece of driven equipment.
Short circuit current (withstand) rating.
Project specific wiring diagrams indicating:


Line/load connection points
Main input and inverter input disconnect switches


Integral motor overloads and manual motor protection for motors.
Fusing/circuit breakers
Auxiliary control transformer
Local/remote circuit
Hand-off-auto circuit
Safety interlock, run permissive, and drive initiated external circuits
Analog inputs and outputs
Pilot lights
Each wire on the wiring diagram shall be labeled with a distinct wire identifier.

8.  VFD panel face diagram indicating the location of the main and inverter disconnect switches, local/remote and H-O-A switches, VFD/bypass switch, pilot lights, digital display, keypad, and any other face mounted device, along with the panel face labeling.

MAINTENANCE DATA AND OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS

Furnish to the Owner five (5) sets of instruction manuals covering installation, operation and servicing procedures for the equipment furnished, and complete illustrated parts breakdown with manufacturer's name, nomenclature, and part number for each component part and assembly. Include a list of recommended spare parts with current unit prices.

ENGINEERING FIELD SERVICE

The manufacturer of the equipment shall provide a qualified engineer to check the complete system after all equipment is installed and wired. Furnish to the Owner, the manufacturer's written certification assuring that each item of equipment is complete, in good condition, free from damage, and properly installed, connected and adjusted. The manufacturer's engineer shall make any adjustments or replacements which may be necessary to ensure the proper functioning of the equipment.

WARRANTY

The VFD shall be warranted by the manufacturer for a period of 36 months from date of start-up. The warranty shall include parts, labor, travel costs, and living expenses incurred by the manufacturer to provide factory authorized service.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

2.1

VARIABLE FREQUENCY DRIVES

A.
Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with the Contract Documents, manufacturers for products specified in this Section shall be one of the following:


ABB
Danfoss
Siemens
Toshiba
Yaskawa

B.
VFDs manufactured by parent companies or their subsidiaries are not acceptable.

C.
All VFDs for the project shall be provided from one supplier and from one manufacturer.
2.2

GENERAL

A.
VFDs designated for installation indoors shall have enclosures rated NEMA 1. VFDs designated for installation outdoors shall have enclosures rated NEMA 3R minimum. The same NEMA requirements shall be provided for enclosures housing a bypass or any other accessory.


Unit shall be dead front construction.

All relays shall be plug-in style base.

All fuses shall be mounted in fuse blocks with insulated covers. Covers shall shield fuse ends and wire terminations.

The VFD (including bypass and other accessories) shall have an overall short circuit current (withstand) rating of 42,000 amps symmetrical minimum and shall be marked with its short circuit current rating in compliance with UL.

The unit, including all specified accessories, shall have a minimum efficiency of 85 percent at any speed from 50 to 100 %. The unit shall have a power factor of 0.9 or higher when operating at any speed from 50 to 100%.

The VFD shall be variable torque type and shall provide full motor torque at any operating speed from 40% to 100%.

The VFD shall provide variable torque V/Hz control when operating at speeds less than 100%.

Provide the VFD with a main input disconnect switch, accessible without opening the drive cabinet, equipped with current limiting fuses and fuse rejection clips, or with circuit breakers. All other fuse blocks with current limiting fuses installed shall be equipped with fuse rejection clips. It shall be possible to padlock the disconnect switch in the off position.

Provide minimum 6 pulse PWM type VFDs.

Provide the necessary electronics to avoid audible noise generated from motor due to frequency change. The unit shall not increase the motor audible noise by more than 3 dB above the motor's across the line noise at any motor speed from 50 to 100 %.

The VFD shall include self diagnostics with a digital display that identifies fault conditions and simplifies trouble shooting. Fault indication shall be retained even after a power outage or an input over-current protective device trip.

VFD shall be provided with RFI/EMI filters.

Unit shall be UL, CSA or ETL labeled.

VFD shall include current sensors on all three output phases to accurately measure motor current.

Provide minimum 3 percent AC input line reactors and/or minimum 5 percent DC link reactors to limit the maximum current total harmonic distortion (THD) to not more than 100% of the VS input current waveform at any VFD operating speed from 20% to 100%. Reactors shall be integral to the VFD. If testing reveals the maximum THD is exceeded, the manufacturer shall provide and install additional reactors at no cost to reduce the THD to within these specified limits.

The VFD shall have a dedicated terminal block for all external inputs and outputs.

For drives supplied with bypass, provide factory mounted and wired 115V, 1 phase, 60 Hz control power transformer sized for handling an additional 30 VA inductive load. Limit fuse size for the control transformer to 3 amps maximum.

The VFD input and output shall be rated at 480V, 3 phase.


Provide a factory mounted and wired manual bypass device as scheduled. The bypass device shall allow the load to run across-the-line while electrically isolating the VFD so that maintenance can be performed on the drive components.

CONTROL FEATURES

The VFD shall be provided with the following control features:

Factory mounted and wired Hand-Off-Auto selector switch that allows local or remote starting or stopping of the drive. Separate start and stop buttons, electronic circuits that "virtually" provide this capability, or other alternative devices are not acceptable.
Factory mounted and wired VFD-Bypass switch, if bypass device is provided.
Factory mounted and wired Local-Remote speed control switch that allows either local or remote control of the drive speed. Key pad buttons are also acceptable provided that permanently labeled, dedicated buttons are provided for the local and the remote speed control functions.
Main input disconnect switch.
Inverter input disconnect switch, accessible without opening the drive cabinet, if bypass device is provided.
Manual speed potentiometer or keypad control, for local speed control with the Local-Remote speed control switch in the Local position.
Provide one VFD for each scheduled motor and branch circuit power/motor protection for each motor.
VFD shall accept an input reference (feedback) signal, 0-10 Vdc analog input, or 4-20 mA analog input, as indicated in VFD schedule, for remote speed control with the Local-Remote speed control switch in the Remote position. Provide input signal isolation to isolate input signal ground from VFD internal control ground.
A remote start/stop contact input that functions in the automatic mode only.
A safety interlock circuit that functions in all drive modes.
A run permissive circuit, separate from the safety interlock circuit, which prevents motor operation when in drive. This circuit, via the customer's external contact device, signals the motor may run, provided the safety interlock contact(s) is made. A typical application would be for a time delay before motor start to allow some external event to occur. The run permissive circuit shall be jumpered from the factory.
Provide the following drive initiated external circuits:

Powered run mode: A circuit that is powered after the motor is started in drive or by-pass modes.
Powered run request: A circuit that is powered whenever the drive safety interlock contact(s) are closed, and the drive H-O-A is in hand, or the drive H-O-A is in auto and the remote start/stop contact is closed.

A standard USB port for direct connection of a Personal Computer (PC) to the VFD. The manufacturer shall provide PC software to allow complete setup and access to the VFD through the USB port. It shall be possible to communicate to the VFD through this USB port without interrupting VFD communications to the building management system
An integral PID controller that, when activated, controls drive speed to maintain a programmed setpoint based on a remote analog input feed-back signal.

The VFD shall be able to apply a scaling factor to the feedback signal
The VFD shall be able to calculate the square root of the feedback signal so that a pressure sensor can be used to measure flow.

A real-time clock shall be an integral part of the VFD.

It shall be possible to use this to display the current date and time on the VFD’s display.
The clock shall include a time clock function with 7 day programmability and a minimum of four programmable time periods per day, with individually selectable ON and OFF functions. The time clock function shall be programmable to control start/stop functions, constant


speeds, PID parameter setpoints and output relays. The time clock function shall be programmable through the controller display and keypad, or by included software that allows programming via a PC and a USB connection.

VFD shall be capable of starting a coasting load.
VFD shall automatically attempt to restart a minimum of three (3) times during an adjustable time period of no less than 30 seconds after shutting off for any reason, except for short circuit or motor overload.
The VFD shall have adjustable motor acceleration and deceleration rates.
The VFD shall have the ability to lock-out a minimum of four critical frequency ranges to prevent the VFD from operating the load at a speed that causes vibration in the driven equipment.
The VFD shall be configured as required to meet system operational requirements including:

Provide an additional set of N.O. contacts on the VFD-Bypass switch that close when the switch is set to Bypass.
Provide one normally open and one normally closed auxiliary contacts to actuate when the motor is started in any mode.
Provide a minimum of one 4-20 ma analog output signal selectable to proportionally indicate drive output frequency, current, or power, or to indicate the VFD input reference/feedback signal, for monitoring by DDC

INDICATORS

Indicating lamp for "POWER AVAILABLE" and for "MOTOR ON BYPASS". Lights shall be LED type.

Motor RPM and AMP display factory mounted on the face of the unit, either as a separate indicator or via the controller display..

SAFETIES

Provide status lights or digital display indication of the cause of any shutdown.

The VFD shall be provided with the following safety features:

VFD over voltage and under voltage protection and protection against temporary power outages.
VFD over temperature protection.
Motor over temperature protection per NEC 430.126(A)(2).
Short circuit and ground fault protection.
Separate motor overload protection functional in by-pass and normal operation.	For VFDs controlling multiple motors, provide overload protection for each motor.
Adjustable current limiter.

LABELING

Provide engraved plastic labels permanently attached to the VFD panel face indicating the function of all switches and indicators, and the equipment served.

Tag all wiring in the drive. Tag nomenclature shall match the corresponding wire identification nomenclature indicated on the approved drive submittal.

For VFDs serving smoke purge, stair pressurization, or other smoke control systems, include an engraved permanently attached red faced label, minimum 6” x 6”, with the following nomenclature: CAUTION: THIS VFD IS PART OF A LIFE SAFETY SMOKE CONTROL SYSTEM. NOTIFY OWNER OR DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY PRIOR TO ANY CHANGE OR MAINTENANCE ACTIVITY TO THIS DRIVE.


PART 3 - EXECUTION

INSTALLATION

Unit installation, including mounting and supports, and wiring to motor shall be by the Electrical Contractor, in compliance with Division 26. Coordinate with the Electrical Trades and Control Trades.

Install the VFD on the motor or as close as possible to the motor. The load side power cables to the motor shall be kept as short as possible and shall not be run in the same conduit as the line side power cables. Control wiring shall be in separate conduit from power wiring. Where applicable, control wires from the motor disconnect early break contacts may be installed with the motor power wiring.

Do not locate the operating means for individually mounted equipment at a height greater than 66 inches above the floor unless prior approval is obtained from the Architect/Engineer.

Assemble the VFD and any accessories and provide all power and grounding connections.

Provide all required fuses as recommended by the equipment manufacturer.

Protect the unit from dirt, dust, water and physical damage prior to and during construction. If the inside of the unit becomes dirty or dusty before acceptance by Owner, it shall be thoroughly cleaned by the unit manufacturer at the contractor's expense.

Where a disconnect is mounted at the driven motor an auxiliary switch in the disconnect shall be wired to the VFD to signal when the disconnect is open

CONNECTIONS

Conduit installation requirements per Division 26. Drawings indicate general arrangement of conduit, fittings, and specialties.

Ground equipment.

Tighten electrical connectors and terminals according to manufacturer’s published torque-tightening values. If manufacturer’s torque values are not included, use those specified in UL 486A and UL 486B.

FIELD QUALITY CONTROL

Provide the services of a factory trained and certified technician to supervise, check, test and start. The contractor shall notify Owner’s representative 5 days in advance of the start-up.

Prepare for acceptance tests as follows:

Test insulation resistance for each VFD element, bus, component, connecting supply, feeder, and control circuit.
Test continuity of each circuit.

Testing: Perform the following field quality-control testing:

After completion of system wiring, the manufacturer’s engineer shall inspect, test, adjust, and re- adjust as necessary, all equipment in terms of design function and performance and provide a written report.
Provide equipment to check the calibration of instruments. Instruments not in calibration shall be recalibrated to function as required or shall be replaced.
Calibrate and adjust devices, linkages, accessories, and components for stable and accurate operation to meet the design intent and to obtain optimum performance from the equipment. Final


adjustment, calibration and checking shall be performed while the system is in full operation. Cause every device to automatically function as intended to insure its proper operation.
After calibration, adjustment and checking have been completed and system is operational, demonstrate to the Owner’s Representative the complete and correct functioning of all system components and equipment. These demonstrations shall consist of operating the controls through their normal full ranges and sequences. Simulate abnormal conditions to demonstrate proper functioning of the devices. Readjust settings to their correct design values and after sufficient time, observe ability of controls to establish the desired conditions, noting abnormal deviations. Make necessary repairs, replacements, or adjustments on items which fail to perform satisfactorily and repeat tests to demonstrate compliance with the design intent.
When system is in specified operational condition, and when pertinent operational functions have been demonstrated, system will be accepted.
Before and after installation, provide a one minute record tape four times a day for 7 days and a onetime video demonstration by the manufacturer of the voltage and current distortion and harmonic distortion of the first six (6) harmonics at the variable frequency drive feeder input circuit breaker and output of variable frequency drive to motor. Submit results in a report to the Architect/Engineer identifying compliance with performance criteria specified herein.
The VFD supplier shall provide, at no additional cost, any additional devices required to meet the THD limits indicated in Part 1 of this specification.

Test Reports: Prepare a written report to record the following:

Test procedures used.
Test results that comply with requirements.
Test results that do not comply with requirements and corrective action taken to achieve compliance with requirements.

ADJUSTING

Set field-adjustable switches and circuit-breaker trip ranges.

VFD CLEANING

Clean internally, on completion of installation, according to manufacturer’s written instructions. Vacuum dirt and debris; do not use compressed air to assist in cleaning.

TRAINING

Training shall not be performed until system is operational and functional and two (2) weeks after receiving approved job specific technical manuals. Scheduling of separate training sessions shall be coordinated with the CM and Owner’s agent.

The manufacturer shall provide a minimum of two 4 hour sessions of training to the Owner’s maintenance staff describing the proper operation, programming, service and maintenance of the VFDs and other components conducted by a factory-trained service technician.


END OF SECTION 20 0514


SECTION 20 0519 – THERMOMETERS, PRESSURE GAUGES, METERS AND ACCESSORIES PART 1 - GENERAL
RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SCOPE OF WORK

Thermometers, pressure gauges, meters and accessories.

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Manufacturers and Products: The products and manufacturers specified in this Section establish the standard of quality for the Work. Subject to compliance with all requirements, provide specified products from the manufacturers named in Part 2.

Reference Standards: Products in this section shall be built, tested, and installed in compliance with the specified quality assurance standards; latest editions, unless noted otherwise.

UL Compliance: Comply with applicable UL standards pertaining to meters and gauges.
ASME and ISA Compliance: Comply with applicable portions of ASME and Instrument Society of America (ISA) standards pertaining to construction and installation of meters and gauges.
ASME/ANSI B40.1, Pressure Gauge Standard.
National Sanitation Foundation NSF/ANSI-61 (potable drinking water) and NSF-61 Annex G (listed as ≤ 0.25% weighted average lead content) Applies to any item in contact with domestic water.
US Safe Drinking Water Act.

SUBMITTALS

Product Data: Include scale range, ratings, and calibrated performance curves for each meter, gage, fitting, specialty, and accessory specified.

Shop Drawings: Include schedule indicating manufacturer's number, scale range, fittings, and location for each meter and gage.

Product Certificates: Signed by manufacturers of meters and gages certifying accuracies under specified operating conditions and compliance with specified requirements.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

THERMOMETERS, GENERAL

Scale Range: Temperature ranges for services listed are as follows:

Service
Range (Degrees F)
Domestic Cold Water
0-120
Domestic Hot Water
0-180
Chilled Water/Condenser Water
0-120

Range and Accuracy: Plus or minus 1 percent of range span or plus or minus one scale division to maximum of 1.5 percent of range span.



C.
Thermometer Wells: Brass or stainless steel, with neck extension for insulated piping, with cap and chain fastened to well. 3/4"NPT, 2 1/2" insertion length, and extension length as required to extend well to outside of insulation. Lead free when used for domestic water applications.
D.
Outdoor thermometers shall be ultraviolet proof and specifically manufactured for outdoor use.
2.2

DIGITAL THERMOMETERS

A.
Manufacturers:


Weiss Model DVBM25 (vari-angle)
Miljoco Electronic Digital (light powered)
Techcontrols

B.
Digital Thermometer: electronic, with LCD display and solar cell, clear plastic window, adjustable angle, separable socket.


Range and accuracy:  -40 to 300 deg.F, accuracy greater of (+/-) 1 deg.F or 1% of reading.
2.3

GLASS THERMOMETERS

A.
Manufacturers:


Industrial Glass
H.O. Trerice
Weksler
Marsh
Ashcroft
Weiss
Miljoco Corporation

B.
Industrial Glass Thermometer: adjustable angle, scale to be 9" long with white aluminum back and black graduation, aluminum casing, blue appearing liquid tube, glass window. Stem for air duct shall be 6" long with protective aluminum slotted bulb guard and mounting flange. Stem for piping shall be 3-1/2" long aluminum, brass or stainless steel, stem to match specified thermometer well. Adjust stem length for insulation extension.
2.4

PRESSURE GAUGES

A.
Manufacturers:


Dwyer
H. O. Trerice
Weksler
Marsh
Ashcroft
Weiss
Miljoco Corporation

B.
Unless otherwise noted, provide all pressure gauges with clear glass window, cast aluminum, stainless steel or polypropylene case, black on white face, stainless steel wetted parts, brass 1/2" MPT socket, 1% full scale accuracy complying with ASME/ANSI B40-1 Grade 1A. Lead free when used for domestic water applications.

C.
Water and Compressed Air Services through 2" piping: 2 1/2" diameter face, stainless steel case, brass or stainless steel 1/4" MPT socket, 2% full scale accuracy.


Water and Compressed Air Services over 2" piping: 4 1/2" diameter face, 6" diameter face for location more than 8 feet above floor, sealed glass window, glycerin filled for connections within 10 feet of pumps. For applications exceeding 145 deg. F, provide 316 stainless steel needle valves rated minimum 500 psi, in lieu of glycerin filled.

Steam Service: 4 1/2" diameter face, 6" diameter face for location more than 8 feet above floor, sealed glass window, brass or stainless steel coil siphon tube with a minimum pressure rating of 1000 psi.

Critical System Pressure Gauges: Stainless steel socket, 1/2% of full range accuracy, 6" diameter face, in accordance with AMSE/ANSI B40-1 Grade 2A. Provide where indicated on the Drawings.

Differential Pressure Gauges: 4 1/2" diameter face, 6" diameter face for location more than 8 feet above floor, sealed glass window, glycerin filled for connections within 10 feet of pumps. For applications exceeding 145 deg. F, provide 316 stainless steel needle valves rated minimum 500 psi, in lieu of glycerin filled. Provide where indicated on the Drawings.

Except where noted otherwise, select range for twice normal operating pressure:

Water (CW and HW): 0-100 psig

Outdoor gauges shall be ultraviolet proof and specifically manufactured for outdoor use.

PRESSURE-GAUGE FITTINGS

Syphons: NPS 1/4 coil of brass tubing with threaded ends.

Snubbers: ASME B40.5, NPS 1/4 brass bushing with corrosion-resistant porous-metal disc of material suitable for system fluid and working pressure.

PRESSURE/TEMPERATURE TEST PLUGS AND KITS

Manufacturers:

Plugs:

Peterson Products Company (Pete’s Plug)
Schrader
Sisco
Miljoco Corporation

Meter:

Auto Flow
Griswold

Provide 1/4" brass pressure and temperature test plugs where shown on drawings, with two core Nordel rated for 275 degrees and 300 psig.

Provide one readout meter kit including required hoses with a minimum 3-1/2" dial differential pressure gauge. Gauge shall read 0 to 60 psig and have end connections to match both the flow valves and plugs. Included in the case shall be two pocket thermometers (25 to 125 and 0 to 220 degrees), gauge adapter, and one pocket pressure gauge (0 to 160 psig). Meter shall become property of Owner (hand over to Owner’s Project Manager) after completion of work.


PART 3 - EXECUTION

METER AND GAGE INSTALLATION – GENERAL

Install meters, gages, and accessories according to manufacturer's written instructions for applications where used.

INSTALLATION OF THERMOMETERS

Install and orient wells and thermometers so thermometer can be read from the floor.

Thermometer Wells: For piping 2" and below, install in piping tee where thermometers are indicated, in vertical position. For piping 2 1/2" and above, "weldolets" may be used. Fill well with oil or graphite and secure cap.

Install as indicated on the drawings

INSTALLATION OF PRESSURE GAUGES

Install pressure gauges with 1/2" isolation ball valve. Where needle valves are specified as a substitute for glycerin filled in Part 2, install the needle valve between the ball valve and the gauge. Locate gauges to be readable from the floor preferably at eye level. Mount gauges securely to prevent excessive vibration, adjust needle valve to dampen pulsations. Install syphon tubes for steam pressure gauges, connected after the isolation ball valve. Do not install pressure gauges on bottom of piping.

Install as indicated on the drawings

INSTALLATION OF TEST PLUGS

Test Plugs: Install in piping tee where indicated, located on pipe at most readable position. Secure cap.

ADJUSTING AND CLEANING

Calibrate meters according to manufacturer's written instructions, after installation.

Adjust faces of meters and gages to proper angle for best visibility.

Clean windows of meters and gages and clean factory-finished surfaces. Replace cracked and broken windows, and repair scratched and marred surfaces with manufacturer's touchup paint.


END OF SECTION 20 0519


SECTION 20 0523 – VALVES

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

Provide valves as scheduled and specified in this Section for the following systems:

Domestic Cold Water
Chilled Water
Refrigerant
Other similar piping systems except where specialty valves are specified under other sections

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Manufacturers and Products: The products and manufacturers specified in this Section establish the standard of quality for the Work. Subject to compliance with all requirements, provide specified products from the manufacturers named in Part 2.

ASME Compliance:

ASME B16.10 and ASME B16.34 for ferrous valve dimensions and design criteria.
ASME B31.1 for power piping valves.
ASME B31.9 for building services piping valves.

Reference Standards: Products in this section shall be built, tested, and installed in compliance with the specified quality assurance standards; latest editions, unless noted otherwise.

National Sanitation Foundation NSF/ANSI-61, including Annex G (listed as ≤ 0.25% weighted average lead content) (and/or NSF/ANSI-372) and Annex F. Applies to any item in contact with domestic (potable) water.
US Safe Drinking Water Act (any item in contact with domestic (potable) water).

DEFINITIONS

The following are standard abbreviations for valves:

CWP: Cold working pressure.
EPDM: Ethylene-propylene-diene terpolymer rubber.
NBR: Acrylonitrile-butadiene rubber.
PTFE: Polytetrafluoroethylene plastic.
SWP: Steam working pressure.
TFE: Tetrafluoroethylene plastic.

SUBMITTALS

Product Data: For each type of valve indicated. Include body, seating, and trim materials; valve design; pressure and temperature classifications; end connections; arrangement; dimensions; and required clearances. Include list indicating valve and its application. Include rated capacities; shipping, installed, and operating weights; furnished specialties; and accessories.


DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING

Prepare valves for shipping as follows:

Protect internal parts against rust and corrosion.
Protect threads, flange faces, grooves, and weld ends.
Set angle, gate, and globe valves closed to prevent rattling.
Set ball and plug valves open to minimize exposure of functional surfaces.
Set butterfly valves closed or slightly open.
Block check valves in either closed or open position.

Use the following precautions during storage:

Maintain valve end protection.
Store valves indoors and maintain at higher than ambient dew-point temperature. If outdoor storage is necessary, store valves off the ground in watertight enclosures.

Use sling to handle large valves; rig sling to avoid damage to exposed parts. Do not use handwheels or stems as lifting or rigging points.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

GENERAL VALVE REQUIREMENTS

All valves shall have bodies, seats, stem seals and disc materials compatible with intended fluid, temperature, pressure and service.

Valve Pressure and Temperature Ratings: Unless noted otherwise, valves shall be rated for a minimum of 125# WSP (working steam pressure)/ 250# WOG (cold water, oil, gas).

Unless noted otherwise, valves through 2" shall have screwed connections for steel piping and sweat connections for copper piping. Domestic cold water, hot water and hot water return shall have sweat connections (lead free); valves 2-1/2" and larger shall be flanged.

Valves in contact with domestic (potable) water shall be “lead free” NSF/ANSI-61 Annex G (and/or NSF/ANSI-372) labeled.

All EPDM shall be peroxide cured. All wetted seals shall be made from materials that are immune from chloramine degradation.

Manually operated valves 4" and larger installed 10 feet above finished floor or higher, shall have chain wheel operators. Chain shall reach to within 7'-0" of floor or operating platform, or within two feet of accessible ceiling.

Valve Sizes: Same as upstream pipe, unless otherwise indicated.

Provide extended valve stems for insulated piping.

Where the valves are installed outdoors, all components including the gear operated wheel operators shall be weatherproofed.

Valve Flanges: ASME B16.1 for cast-iron valves, ASME B16.5 for steel valves, and ASME B16.24 for bronze valves.

Valve Bypass and Drain Connections: MSS SP-45.


Solder Joint: With sockets according to ASME B16.18.

Caution: Use solder with melting point below 840 deg F for angle, check, and globe valves; below 421 deg F for ball valves.

Threaded: With threads according to ASME B1.20.1.

Valve Actuators:

Chainwheel: For attachment to valves, of size and mounting height, as indicated in the "Valve Installation" Article in Part 3. I didn’t see any additional information about chainwheel requirements in Part 3
Gear Drive: For quarter-turn valves, provide gear operators for all butterfly valve sizes.
Handwheel: For valves other than quarter-turn NPS 5 and smaller.
Lever Handle: For quarter-turn valves NPS 6 and smaller, except plug valves.
Wrench: For plug valves with square heads. Furnish Owner with 1 wrench for every 10 plug valves, for each size square plug head.

BALL VALVE

Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Apollo
Milwaukee
NIBCO
Watts
Bonomi
Jomar

Two-piece, full port, bronze body, stainless steel ball and stem:

Description:

Standard: MSS SP-110
SWP Rating: 150 psig
CWP Rating: 600 psig
Body Design: Two Piece
Body Material: Bronze
Ends: Threaded
Seats: PTFE or TFE
Stem: Stainless Steel
Ball: Stainless Steel, vented
Port: Full
Handle: Plastic Coated Lever
Locking Device: When Noted on Drawings
Approvals: UL or CSA for Natural Gas Service

BUTTERFLY VALVE

Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Bray
Dezurik
Jamesbury
Milwaukee
Tri-Seal Valve
Xomox


ABZ 397 Series
Jomar

Unless noted otherwise, all butterfly valves shall be full lug construction, suitable for bi-directional dead end service, and have open position memory stop. Manually operated butterfly valves 4" and larger shall have enclosed worm gear operators with position indicators.

Class 150 Butterfly Valves:

Description:

Resilient Seat
Standard: MSS SP-68
CWP Rating: 200 psig at 150 Deg F
Body Design: Lug type; suitable for bidirectional dead-end service at rated pressure without use of downstream flange.
Body Material: Ductile Iron
Seat: EPDM
Shaft: Positive Drive Blow-Out Proof 416SS Shaft, graphite Teflon impregnated stem bushings, O-ring stem seal
Disc: 316 Stainless Steel
Service: Bidirectional

HIGH PERFORMANCE BUTTERFLY VALVE

Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Bray – Braylok Series 41
Dezurik – BHP
Jamesbury - 815L
Milwaukee - HP Series
Tri-Seal Valve-Contromatics
Xomox Pliaseal
ABZ Absolute Series 402

Unless noted otherwise, all butterfly valves shall be full lug construction, suitable for bi-directional dead end service, and have open position memory stop. Manually operated butterfly valves 4" and larger shall have enclosed worm gear operators with position indicators.

Class 150 High-Performance Butterfly Valves:

Description:

Standard: MSS SP-68
CWP Rating: 150 psig at 250 Deg F
Body Design: Lug type; suitable for bidirectional dead-end service at rated pressure without use of downstream flange.
Body Material: Carbon steel (316 SS if required for NSF 61 compliance for domestic water)
Seat: Reinforced PTFE
Shaft: 17-4 PH Stainless Steel; offset from seat plane with Teflon stem packing
Disc: 316 Stainless Steel
Bearings: 316SS/PTFE Upper and Lower Stem
Seat Leakage: ANSI Class VI
Service: Bidirectional


HIGH PERFORMANCE METAL-TO-METAL SEATED BUTTERFLY VALVE

Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Bray Trilok
Crane Flowseal MS
Metso/Neles Neldisc
Adams MAK
ABZ Extreme 6000 Series
Weir Tricentric
Zwick Tri-Con

Class 150 High-Performance Butterfly Valves:

Description:

Metal Seated triple offset type valve
CWP Rating: 150 psig at 550 Deg F
Body Design: Lug type; suitable for bidirectional dead-end service at rated pressure without use of downstream flange.
Body Material: Carbon steel
Seat: Laminated 316SS/Graphite
Shaft: A564-630 H1100
Disc: 316 Stainless Steel
Bearings: 304SS/Graphite Upper and Lower Stem with SS Collar
Seat Leakage: Zero leakage closure classification per CFI 70-2 Class 4

Valve Flow Capacity: The Cv value for various valve sizes in the full open position shall be as follows:

1.	4 inch:
230
2.	6 inch:
660
3.	8 inch:
1500
4.	10 inch:
2400
5.	12 inch:
3600
6.	14 inch:
5500
7.	16 inch:
7600
8.	18 inch:
10300
9.	20 inch:
13000
10.	24 inch:
20200

BUTTERFLY VALVE – GROOVED

Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Victaulic Vic-300


Grooved ductile iron body, suitable for installation with grooved piping, EPDM coated steel disc and shaft, stainless steel hub bearing, EPDM seat, Teflon stem packing. Rated for 300 psi, 230 degrees F.

Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Grinnel Gruvlock Series 7700

Grooved nylon coated ductile iron body, EPDM coated ductile iron disc, stainless steel shaft, bronze shaft bearing.


Grooved butterfly valves may be used only within grooved piping systems and only when specifically noted as permitted in other related Section. Otherwise, standard butterfly valves shall be provided.

SWING CHECK VALVE

Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Milwaukee 509
Crane 37
Grinnell 3300
NIBCO
Apollo
Kitz

Bronze body and trim swing check valve

SILENT CHECK VALVE

Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Wafer Style:

Milwaukee - Series 1400
APCO - Series 300
Mueller
Metraflex
Titan Flow Control, Inc.

Globe Style:

Milwaukee
APCO
Mueller
Metraflex
Apollo
Titan Flow Control, Inc.

Spring loaded type check valve, stainless steel spring, iron body and bronze trim

LUBRICATED PLUG VALVE

Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Homestead
Miliken
Resun

Class 125, Lubricated Plug Valves:

Description:

Standard: MSS SP-78
NPS 2” and Smaller: CWP Rating: 150 psig, bronze body, square head, threaded ends
NPS 2-1/2” and Larger: CWP Rating: 175 psig, semi-steel body, wrench operated, single gland, flanged ends
Pattern: Straight away
Plug: Cast iron or bronze with sealant groove


DRAIN VALVE

General Service: Ball valve with 3/4-inch hose threaded end fitting and cap.

MANUAL BALANCING VALVE

General Manual Balancing Valve Requirements:

Provide ports for measuring flow, memory stop, bubble tight shut-off, valve Cv characteristics suitable for throttling.
Size valve to produce readable design flow and maximum full open pressure drop of 3 feet.
Ensure NSF 61 compliance for balance valves used in domestic (potable) water systems

Through 2": brass body, brass or stainless steel ball or brass disc or plug, calibrated.

Manufacturers:

Bell & Gossett Circuit Setter Plus
Armstrong
IMI Flow Design Accusetter
Taco
Victaulic

Valves 2-1/2"and larger: cast iron or ductile iron body, brass ball or brass or bronze disc, EPDM seat, and brass or stainless steel stem.

Manufacturers:

Bell & Gossett Circuit Setter Plus
Armstrong
IMI Flow Design Accusetter
Taco
Victaulic

Venturi Style: bronze body, brass ball, and venturi flow measuring station.

Manufacturers:

Preso B Plus
IMI Flow Design Accusetter

Provide gauge kit for projects requiring over 20 balancing valves. Gauge kits shall be capable of directly reading GPM or shall include conversion chart from Cv and pressure. Provide to Owner’s Project Manager

SOLENOID VALVE

Manufacturer: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Magnetrol Figure No. 200-A
ASCO
Skinner

Full port, bronze body, malleable iron coil enclosure, stainless steel plunger, valve stem, bonnet tube, and spring, Buna-N seal, rated for 500 psi. See drawings for voltage, size and position (NC or NO).

REFRIGERANT VALVES & SPECIALTIES


General: Complete valve assembly shall be and designed to conform to ARI 760.

Globe: 450 psig maximum operating pressure, 275 deg. F maximum operating temperature; cast bronze body, with cast bronze or forged brass wing cap and bolted bonnet; replaceable resilient seat disc; plated steel stem. Valve shall be capable of being repacked under pressure. Valve shall be straight through or angle pattern, with solder-end connections.

Check Valves:

Smaller Than 7/8 Inch: 500 psig maximum operating pressure, 300 deg. F maximum operating temperature; cast brass body, with removable piston, Teflon seat, and stainless steel spring; straight through globe design. Valve shall be straight through pattern, with solder-end connections
7/8 inch and Larger: 450 psig maximum operating pressure, 300 deg. F maximum operating temperature; cast bronze body, with cast bronze or forged brass bolted bonnet; floating piston with mechanically retained Teflon seat disc. Valve shall be straight through or angle pattern, with solder- end connections.

Solenoid Valves: UL-listed, 250 deg. F temperature rating, 400 psig working pressure; forged brass, with Teflon valve seat, two-way straight through pattern, and solder end connections. Provide manual operator to open valve. Furnish complete with NEMA 1 solenoid enclosure with 1/2 inch conduit adapter, holding coil, voltage to meet controls requirements.

Thermal Expansion Valves: thermostatic adjustable, modulating type; size as required for specific evaporator requirements, and factory set for proper evaporator superheat requirements. Valves shall have copper fittings for solder end connections; complete with sensing bulb, a distributor having a side connection for hot gas bypass line, and an external equalizer line.

Hot Gas Bypass Valve: adjustable type, sized to provide capacity reduction beyond the last step of compressor unloading; and wrought copper fittings for solder end connections.

VRF refrigerant isolation valves: Compatible with R410A and PVE (polyvinyl ether oil), operating range of - 40F to 300F, working pressure of 550 psi (capable of transient pressure spikes to 700 psi), full port valve with zero pressure drop, bi-directional flow, service port in valve body, brazed connections.

Charging and Purging Valves:

Manufacturer: Henry

Refrigeration Ball Valve:

Manufacturer: Henry

Refrigeration Piping Specialties

General: Complete refrigerant piping specialty assembly shall be UL-listed and designed to conform to ARI 760.
Strainers: 500 psig maximum working pressure; forged brass body with monel 80-mesh screen, and screwed cleanout plug; Y-pattern, with solder end connections.
Moisture/liquid Indicators: 500 psig maximum operation pressure, 200 deg. F maximum operating temperature; forged brass body, with replaceable polished optical viewing window, and solder end connections.
Filter-driers: 500 psig maximum operation pressure; steel shell, flange ring, and spring, ductile iron cover plate with steel capscrews, and wrought copper fittings for solder end connections. Furnish complete with replaceable filter-drier core kit, including gaskets, as follows:

Standard capacity desiccant sieves to provide micronic filtration.
High capacity desiccant sieves to provide micronic filtration and extra drying capacity.


Suction Line Filter-Drier: 350 psig maximum operation pressure, 225 deg. F maximum operating temperature; steel shell, and wrought copper fittings for solder end connections. Permanent filter element shall be molded felt core surrounded by a desiccant for removal of acids and moisture for refrigerant vapor.
Suction Line Filters: 500 psig maximum operation pressure; steel shell, flange ring, and spring, ductile iron cover plate with steel capscrews, and wrought copper fittings for solder end connections. Furnish complete with replaceable filter core kit, including gaskets, as follows:

Standard capacity desiccant sieves to provide micronic filtration.
High capacity desiccant sieves to provide micronic filtration and extra drying capacity.

Flexible Connectors: 500 psig maximum operating pressure; seamless tin bronze or stainless steel core, high tensile bronze braid covering, solder connections, and synthetic covering; dehydrated, pressure tested, minimum 7 inch in length. Manufacturer: Anaconda

PART 3 - EXECUTION

VALVE APPLICATION SCHEDULE

Domestic Cold Water Systems:

Isolation through 2": Ball Valve
Isolation 2-1/2" and Larger: Butterfly Valve NSF 61 Compliant
Main Service Water Valve at Building Entrance: High Performance Butterfly Valve NSF 61 Compliant
Check 2-1/2” and Larger: Silent Check Valve
Balancing: Manual Balancing Valve

Chilled Water Systems:

Isolation through 2": Ball Valve.
Isolation 2-1/2" and Larger: Butterfly Valve.
Check through 2”: Swing Check Valve
Check 2-1/2” and Larger: Silent Check Valve
Balancing: Manual Balancing Valve

EXAMINATION

Examine piping system for compliance with requirements for installation tolerances and other conditions affecting performance. Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected.

Examine valve interior for cleanliness, freedom from foreign matter, and corrosion. Remove special packing materials, such as blocks, used to prevent disc movement during shipping and handling.

Operate valves in positions from fully open to fully closed. Examine guides and seats made accessible by such operations.

Examine threads on valve and mating pipe for form and cleanliness.

Examine mating flange faces for conditions that might cause leakage. Check bolting for proper size, length, and material. Verify that gasket is of proper size, that its material composition is suitable for service, and that it is free from defects and damage.

Do not attempt to repair defective valves; replace with new valves.

VALVE INSTALLATION


Piping installation requirements are specified in other Division 20, 21, 22 and 23 Sections. Drawings indicate general arrangement of piping, fittings, and specialties.

Install valves such that operator is completely operable, and the valve position indicator is discernible from the floor.

Install valves with unions or flanges at each piece of equipment arranged to allow service, maintenance, and equipment removal without system shutdown.

Locate valves for easy access and provide separate support where necessary.

Provide branch isolation valves at all branch piping take-offs from main headers whether specifically indicated on the drawings or not. This pertains to all piping systems.

Install valves in horizontal piping with stem at or above center of pipe.

Install valves in position to allow full stem movement.

Solenoid Valve Installation Requirements:

Provide a strainer before each solenoid valve. Provide a water hammer arrestor upstream of solenoid valves used for water service.

Natural Gas Valve Installation Requirements:

Install valves in accessible locations, protected from physical damage. Do not locate valves in plenum ceilings.
Install isolation valve upstream and within 6 feet of gas appliance. Install a union or flanged connection downstream from the valve to permit removal of controls.

Steam, Condensate and Domestic Hot Water Valve Installation:

For general service applications: steam and condensate flanged valves shall be installed with Flexitallic gaskets, 316L stainless steel, with “Flexicarb” filler.
For general service applications, domestic hot water flanged valves shall be installed with 100% PTFE gaskets, Interlex SQ-S.
For Utility Tunnels: Domestic hot water flanged valves shall be installed with Garlock Blue-Gard Style 3000 ring type gaskets or comparable. Full face gaskets allowed only when BOTH flanges are full face.
For Utility Tunnels: steam and condensate flanged valves shall be installed with Flexitallic gaskets, 316 L stainless steel, with "Flexicarb" filler. Steam butterfly valves with removable seat screw heads that would interfere with the metal strip winding shall be installed with Garlock Style 9800 gaskets on the seat screw head side.


END OF SECTION 20 0523


SECTION 20 0529 – HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR MECHANICAL

PART 1 - GENERAL

1.1

RELATED DOCUMENTS

A.
Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.
1.2

SUMMARY

A.
This Section includes hangers and supports for mechanical system piping ductwork and equipment.
1.3

DEFINITIONS

A.
MSS: Manufacturers Standardization Society for the Valve and Fittings Industry.

B.
Terminology: As defined in MSS SP-90, "Guidelines on Terminology for Pipe Hangers and Supports."
1.4

PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS

A.
Delegated Design: Design trapeze pipe hangers and equipment supports, including comprehensive engineering analysis by a qualified professional engineer, using performance requirements and design criteria indicated.

B.
Structural Performance: Hangers and supports for piping and equipment shall withstand the effects of gravity loads and stresses within limits and under conditions indicated according to ASCE/SEI 7.


Design supports for multiple pipes, including pipe stands, capable of supporting combined weight of supported systems, system contents, and test water.
Design equipment supports capable of supporting combined operating weight of supported equipment and connected systems and components.

C.
Engineering Responsibility: Design and preparation of Shop Drawings and calculations for each multiple pipe support, trapeze, and equipment support by a qualified professional engineer.


Professional Engineer Qualifications: A professional engineer who is legally qualified to practice in jurisdiction where Project is located and who is experienced in providing engineering services of the kind indicated. Engineering services are defined as those performed for installations of hangers and supports that are similar to those indicated for this Project in material, design and extent.
1.5

QUALITY ASSURANCE

A.
Structural Steel Welding Qualifications: Qualify procedures and personnel according to AWS D1.1/D1.1M, "Structural Welding Code - Steel."

B.
Pipe Welding Qualifications: Qualify procedures and operators according to ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code.
1.6

SUBMITTALS

A.
Product Data: For each type of product indicated.

B.
Shop Drawings: Signed and sealed by a qualified professional engineer for multiple piping supports and trapeze hangers. Include design calculations and indicate size and characteristics of components and fabrication details.


Shop Drawings – Non-Penetrating Rooftop Hangers and Supports:

Provide project specific, engineered stamped shop drawings and calculations including extents of installation, load bearing capacity and structural requirements.
Show installation layout, indicating product type and spacing. Coordinate with manufacturer's take off evaluations, measurements, control dimensions, and rooftop requirements analysis.
Show details of each roofing system including material layers and thicknesses, flashing, terminations, and penetrations with each rooftop support system to be installed.
All supports shall be pre-assembled and shipped for turnkey installation. Indicate all steps and preparation required by others.

DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING

Package for delivery to best protect finish surfaces while using the least amount of single-use packaging as possible. If possible, package and ship product using reusable blankets and fabrics or reusable cardboard and crate systems.

Protect materials against weather and contact with damp or wet surfaces from time of delivery through time of installation. Store materials inside under cover and keep them dry and protected against damage from weather, condensation, direct sunlight, construction traffic, and other causes.

When storing prior to installation, raise off floor on pallets, stack flat with protective material between to eliminate chance of creating nicks, scratches, and other imperfections and damage to finish surfaces, wrap weather-tight, and provide for air circulation within and around stacks and under temporary coverings.

Do not allow materials to become damp. Maintain temperatures at 60°F or higher, and humidity between 20% and 60% prior to, during and after installation.

WARRANTY

Non-Penetrating Rooftop Hangers and Supports:

Provide manufacturers standard product warranty against defects in manufacturing, proper operation, and against damaging roofing membrane when products are installed in accordance with engineered shop drawings and manufacturer's instructions. Warranty is not a maintenance agreement, insurance policy or obligation to repair leaks determined to be a result of the building design, installation, construction error, misuse of system, failure to inspect or maintain system or other limitations in manufacturer's standard warranty.

Warranty Period: 20 years.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

MANUFACTURERS

Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Pipe Hangers:

Anvil
Cooper B-Line
Carpenter & Patterson, Inc.
PHD Manufacturing
Unistrut Corporation
Powerstrut


Channel Support Systems:

Anvil
Cooper B-Line
Carpenter & Patterson, Inc.
PHD Manufacturing
Unistrut Corporation
Powerstrut

Thermal-Hanger Shield Inserts:

Cooper B-Line
ERICO International Corporation
Pipe Shields, Inc.
Rilco Manufacturing Company
Value Engineered Products
American Mechanical Insulation Sales

Non-Penetrating Rooftop Hangers and Supports:

nVent Caddy Pyramid
Miro Industries, Inc.
Big Foot Systems

Roof Mounted Equipment Supports:

The Pate Company
Thybar Corporation
RPS/Hart & Cooley, LLC

Drilled Insert Anchors:

Hilti
Powers Fasteners

Cast in Place Concrete Inserts:

Unistrut
Grinnell
Anvil Fig 285 for loads up to 400 lb
Anvil Fig 281 for loads up to 1200 lb

Powder-Actuated Fastener Systems: NOT ALLOWED

METAL PIPE HANGERS AND SUPPORTS

Provide adjustable type pipe hangers, supports and accessories for the proper support of all piping.

Pipe Hangers, Supports, and Components: MSS SP-58, factory-fabricated components. Refer to "Hanger and Support Application" Article in Part 3 for where to use specific hanger and support types.

Carbon-Steel Pipe Hangers and Supports:

Description: MSS SP-58, factory-fabricated components.
Galvanized Metallic Coatings: Pre-galvanized or hot dipped.
Nonmetallic Coatings: Plastic coating, jacket, or liner.


Padded Hangers: Hanger with fiberglass or other pipe insulation pad or cushion to support bearing surface of piping.
Hanger Rods: Continuous-thread rod, nuts, and washer made of carbon steel.

Copper Pipe Hangers:

Description: MSS SP-58, copper-coated-steel, factory-fabricated components.
Hanger Rods: Continuous-thread rod, nuts, and washer made of copper coated steel.

Dielectric protection for hangers and supports: Where copper piping is supported with steel hangers and supports, dielectric protection must be provided. Use one of the following means as applicable:

Coated hangers (copper or plastic coating)
Insulation inserts
Cushion clamps

METAL FRAMING/CHANNEL SUPPORT SYSTEMS

Metal Framing Manufacturer’s Association (MFMA) Manufacturer Metal Framing Systems:

Description: Shop- or field-fabricated pipe-support assembly for supporting multiple parallel pipes.
Standard: MFMA-4.
Channels: Continuous slotted steel channel with in-turned lips.
Channel Nuts: Formed or stamped steel nuts or other devices designed to fit into channel slot and, when tightened, prevent slipping along channel.
Hanger Rods: Continuous-thread rod, nuts, and washer made of carbon steel for general applications.
Metallic Coating: Manufacturer’s standard finish, unless bare metal surfaces are indicated.
Paint Coating: None
Plastic Coating: Provide on attachments for electrolytic protection where attachments are in direct contact with copper tubing.
Combination Coating: None

TRAPEZE PIPE HANGERS

Description: MSS SP-69, Type 59, shop- or field-fabricated pipe-support assembly made from structural- steel shapes with MSS SP-58 hanger rods, nuts, saddles, and U-bolts.

THERMAL-HANGER SHIELD INSERT ASSEMBLIES

Except as noted, thermal hanger shield “insert” assemblies shall be used on all insulated pipe systems at each horizontal support, and at each clamped or guided vertical support. Manufactured units shall comply with MSS SP-58 standards and be tested per MSS SP-89 guidelines. Each assembly shall closely fit the various pipe diameters and match the outside diameter of the adjoining pipe insulation. Provide pre- grooved inserts when piping is heat traced. Compressive strength shall be adequate to prevent deformation at the project’s hanger spacing requirements, with a minimum 3:1 safety factor.

Thermal hanger shield insert assembly: Water-repellent treated, ASTM C 533, Type I calcium silicate, asbestos free insert. With G-90 galvanized sheet metal shield. With attached vapor barrier, where indicated. Each component shall have an ASTM E84 flame/smoke rating maximum of 25/50.

Inserts for Cold Piping (piping conveying materials less than or equal to 60F), including all chilled water and domestic cold water piping: Insert with an attached vapor barrier.

Provide insert and sheet metal shield covering entire circumference of pipe.


Inserts for Hot Piping (piping conveying materials at more than 60F and that is required to be insulated): Insert only with no vapor barrier.

For clevis or band hangers that support pipe from bottom: Insert and sheet metal shield shall cover lower 180 degrees of pipe, or entire circumference of pipe.
For trapeze hangers or clamped pipe: Insert and sheet metal shield shall cover entire circumference of pipe.

Inserts for piping less than 3/4 inch diameter: Not required except for piping conveying materials less than 45ºF.

Minimum Compressive Strength of Insert Material:

100 psig for sizes smaller than NPS 6.
600 psig for sizes NPS 6 and larger.

Insert Length: Extend 2 inches beyond sheet metal shield.

Vapor barrier: meeting ASTM C1136, with 0.02 perms maximum water vapor permeance.

Adhesives shall comply with NFPA 90-A.

Sheet Metal Shield Dimensions for Pipe: Not less than the following:

NPS 1/4 to NPS 3-1/2: 12 inches long and 0.048 inch thick.
NPS 4: 12 inches long and 0.06 inch thick.
NPS 5 and NPS 6: 18 inches long and 0.06 inch thick
NPS 8 to NPS 14: 24 inches long and 0.075 inch thick

BUILDING ATTACHMENTS FOR MECHANICAL WORK SUPPORTS

General Requirements:

Provide building attachments required for supporting mechanical work, suitably selected and installed for the loads applied with a minimum additional safety factor of 3.
Where specified attachments are not suitable for conditions, submit to Engineer for approval, proposal for alternate building attachments.
Provide supplemental trapeze supports where necessary. Design trapeze to support all trades. Coordinate loads and supports with all trades. Size trapeze for maximum deflection of 1/64 of the span.

Attachments to Structural Steel:

Support mechanical work from building structural steel where possible and approved. No welding or bolting to structural steel is permitted unless authorized by Architect. C-clamps are only allowed when restraining straps are used. C-clamps can be used without restraining straps for Division 21 work only.

Cast in Place Concrete Inserts:

Provide inserts selected for applied load of present load plus 100% for future, and coordinated with concrete work. Plan, lay-out and coordinate setting of inserts prior to concrete pour.
Drilled Insert Anchors:
Where mechanical work cannot be supported from structural steel, or cast in place concrete inserts, provide drilled concrete insert anchors. Submit for approval, project specific installation


drawings for all loads over 100 lbs. Install inserts in web of beam if possible and approved. Insert depth shall not exceed two thirds the thickness of the concrete. Where existing concrete appears to be deteriorating, or where applied load at insert exceeds 1000 lbs., conduct test of concrete to determine de-rated capacity of insert. Anchors may be adhesive or expansion type up to 1000 lbs., and shall be adhesive type for loads over 1000 lbs.

Attachments to metal decking: NOT ALLOWED.

ROOFTOP HANGERS AND SUPPORTS

General Requirements for Pipe Stands: Shop- or field-fabricated assemblies made of manufactured corrosion-resistant components to support roof-mounted piping.

Non-Penetrating Rooftop Hangers and Supports:

Dynamic Support Piping up to 3”: Roller bearing pipe support for roof-mounted gas pipes with the following properties:

Base Material: Polycarbonate.
Deck Base: 9 by 15-1/4 inch.
Pipe Clearance: Adjustable from 4-1/2 inch to 13 inch.
Maximum Load Weight: 186 pounds per pipestand.
Pipe Rests: Self-lubricating polycarbonate resin roller, axle, and collar.
Support All-Thread and Metal Parts: Stainless Steel.
Nominal Inside Diameter: 3 inch.
Maximum Outside Diameter: 4-1/2 inch.
Spacing: Horizontal support spacing per pipe specification. Manufacturer's suggested spacing shall not exceed 10 foot centers as loading permits.

Dynamic Support Piping up to 4”: Roller bearing pipe support for roof-mounted gas pipes with the following properties:

Base Material: Polycarbonate.
Deck Base: 9 by 15-1/4 inch.
Pipe Clearance: Adjustable from 4-1/2 inch to 12 inch.
Maximum Load Weight: 186 pounds per pipestand.
Pipe Rest: Self-lubricating polycarbonate resin roller, axle, and collar.
Support All-Thread and Metal Parts: Stainless Steel.
Nominal Inside Diameter: 4 inch.
Maximum Outside Diameter: 4-1/2 inch.
Spacing: Horizontal support spacing per pipe specification. Manufacturer's suggested spacing shall not exceed 10 foot centers as loading permits.

Elevated Channel – 7” Clear: Strut pipe support system for ganging roof-mounted, VRF refrigerant piping, mounted to base, fastened with pipe clamps and with the following properties:

Base Material: Polycarbonate.

Deck Base: 9 by 15-1/4 inch.
Pipe Clearance: Adjustable from 4-1/4 inch to 7-3/4 inch.
Maximum Load Weight on Base: 223 pounds per pipestand.

Pipe Rests: 16 inch hot-dipped galvanized steel struts connected with stainless steel all thread to base.
Spacing: Horizontal support spacing per pipe specification. Manufacturer's suggested spacing shall not exceed 10 foot centers as loading permits.
If supporting insulated pipe a shield or saddle shall be used.


Custom Duct Supports: Duct support is a custom product designed for single or multiple duct supports. Provide rooftop duct layout shop drawings for manufacturer's use and the following:

Deck Bases: Polycarbonate, 16 by 18 inch.
Duct Dimensions: Refer to drawings.
Minimum/Maximum Clearance Above Roof: 12/18 inches.
Duct Insulation Thickness: Refer to Section 20 0700 “Mechanical Insulation”.
Maximum Outside Dimension: Refer to drawings.
Total Length of Duct Run: Refer to drawings.
Quantity of Supports Required: To be determined by duct support manufacturer.

EQUIPMENT SUPPORTS

Description: Welded, shop- or field-fabricated equipment support made from structural carbon-steel shapes.

ROOF MOUNTED EQUIPMENT SUPPORTS

Construction:

Equipment supports shall be constructed using minimum 18-gauge LFQ, CQ, G-90 galvanized steel, or heavier gauge (as required). Fully mitered and welded corners. Integral base plates. All welds prime painted after fabrication. Full depth internal C-channel reinforcing on 18” centers. Full length top seam. 18-gauge counterflashing factory installed with tek-screws and neoprene washers. Factory installed 2” x 4” pressure treated wood nailer.
Minimum height of equipment supports shall be 12” above finished roof or as specified.
Additional Requirements:

Sloped to match roof pitch and provide a level top
Additional height (where indicated)
Engineered calculations per ASCE 7
Vibration isolation (where indicated)

MISCELLANEOUS MATERIALS

Mechanical-Anchor Fasteners: Insert-type attachments with pull-out and shear capacities appropriate for supported loads and building materials where used.

Structural Steel: ASTM A 36/A 36M, steel plates, shapes, and bars, black and galvanized.

Grout: ASTM C 1107, Grade B, factory-mixed and -packaged, non-shrink and nonmetallic, dry, hydraulic- cement grout.

Characteristics: Post hardening and volume adjusting; recommended for both interior and exterior applications.
Properties: Non-staining, noncorrosive, and nongaseous.
Design Mix: 5000-psi, 28-day compressive strength.

Support Pads: Designed specifically to fit non-penetrating rooftop supports while protecting the rooftop envelope. Slip resistant and heat molded with a small lip to hold the support pad and reduce movement on the rooftop.

Support Pad Material: 100 percent recycled rubber.
Dimensions: Minimum 2 inches larger than support base width and length.


PART 3 - EXECUTION

HANGER AND SUPPORT APPLICATIONS

Comply with MSS SP-69 for pipe hanger selections and applications

Comply with all guidelines and limitations for loading and fastening where indicated on structural or architectural project documents.

Use hangers and supports with galvanized metallic coatings for piping and equipment that will not have field-applied finish.

Use nonmetallic coatings on attachments for electrolytic protection where attachments are in direct contact with copper tubing.

Use carbon-steel for pipe hangers, supports and attachments for general service applications.

Use corrosion resistant steel for pipe hangers, supports and attachments for outdoor use and for hostile environment applications.

Use copper-plated pipe hangers and copper or stainless steel attachments for copper piping and tubing.

Use padded hangers for piping that is subject to scratching.

Use thermal-hanger shield inserts for insulated piping and tubing.

Horizontal-Piping Hangers and Supports: Unless otherwise indicated, install the following types:

Adjustable Steel Clevis Hangers (MSS Type 1): For suspension of noninsulated or insulated stationary pipes, NPS 1/2 to NPS 30.
Pipe Saddle Supports (MSS Type 36): For support of pipes, NPS 4 to NPS 20 with steel pipe base stanchion support and cast-iron floor flange or carbon steel plate.
Adjustable Pipe Saddle Supports (MSS Type 38): For stanchion-type support for pipes, NPS 2-1/2 to NPS 36, if vertical adjustment is required, with steel pipe base stanchion support and cast-iron floor flange.
Single Pipe Rolls (MSS Type 41): For suspension of pipes, NPS 1 to NPS 30, from two rods if longitudinal movement caused by expansion and contraction might occur.
Adjustable Roller Hangers (MSS Type 43): For suspension of pipes, NPS 2-1/2 to NPS 20, from single rod if horizontal movement caused by expansion and contraction might occur.

Vertical Piping Clamps: Unless otherwise indicated, install the following types:

Extension Pipe or Riser Clamps (MSS Type 8): For support of pipe risers, NPS 3/4 to NPS 24.
Carbon- or Alloy-Steel Riser Clamps (MSS Type 42): For support of pipe risers, NPS 3/4 to NPS 24, if longer ends are required for riser clamps.

Hanger Rod Attachments:	Unless otherwise indicated and except as specified in piping system Specification Sections, install the following types:

Steel Turnbuckles (MSS Type 13): For adjustment up to 6 inches for heavy loads.
Steel Clevises (MSS Type 14): For 120 to 450 deg F piping installations.

Building Attachments: Unless otherwise indicated, install the following types:

Steel or Malleable Concrete Inserts (MSS Type 18): For upper attachment to suspend pipe hangers from concrete ceiling.


Support mechanical work from building structural steel where possible and approved. No welding or bolting to structural steel is permitted unless authorized by Architect.
C-clamps are allowed with restraining straps only.
Center-Beam Clamps (MSS Type 21 or 28) for loads over 120 lb: For attaching to center of bottom flange of beams. Malleable center hung Anvil Fig. 228.
Side-Beam Clamps (MSS Type 20 or 27) - for loads up to 120 lb

Shields: Unless otherwise indicated and except as specified in piping system Sections, install the following types:

Protection Shields (MSS Type 40): Of length and thickness per Section 2.5 above.

Thermal-Hanger Shield Inserts: Used on all insulated pipe systems at each horizontal support, and at each clamped or guided vertical support per Section 2.5 above.

Spring Hangers and Supports: Unless otherwise indicated and except as specified in piping system Sections, install the following types:

Spring Cushions (MSS Type 48): For light loads if vertical movement does not exceed 1-1/4 inches.
Spring-Cushion Roll Hangers (MSS Type 49): For equipping Type 41, roll hanger with springs.

Comply with MSS SP-69 for trapeze pipe-hanger selections and applications that are not specified in piping system Sections.

Comply with MFMA-103 for metal framing system selections and applications that are not specified in piping system Sections.

HANGER AND SUPPORT INSTALLATION

Pipe Hanger and Support Installation:	Comply with MSS SP-69 and MSS SP-89.	Install hangers, supports, clamps, and attachments as required to properly support piping from building structure.

Metal Framing/Channel Support System Installation: Arrange for grouping of parallel runs of piping and support together on field-assembled channel systems.

Field assemble and install according to manufacturer's written instructions.

Metal Trapeze Pipe Hanger Installation: Comply with MSS SP-69 and MSS SP-89. Arrange for grouping of parallel runs of horizontal piping and support together on field-fabricated, trapeze pipe hangers

Pipes of Various Sizes: Support together and space trapezes for smallest pipe size or install intermediate supports for smaller diameter pipes as specified above for individual pipe hangers.
Field fabricate from ASTM A 36/A 36M, steel shapes selected for loads being supported. Weld steel according to AWS D-1.1.

Fastener System Installation:

Install mechanical-expansion anchors in concrete after concrete is placed and completely cured. Install fasteners according to manufacturer's written instructions.

Non-Penetrating Rooftop Hangers and Supports: Install in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions.

Clean roofing surfaces in accordance with the roofing manufacturer's instructions prior to installation.
Prepare surfaces using the methods recommended by the manufacturer for achieving the best result for each substrate under the project conditions
Install supports and hangers in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations.


Install supports at maximum spacing of 10 feet unless closer spacing is required due to weight of pipe or conduit requirements, or greater spacing is specifically allowed by support manufacturer.

Space and adjust supports to evenly distribute weight.
Do not exceed support manufacturer's recommended load limits or specified mechanical piping limits.

Remove roofing aggregate from area 2 inches larger than support base; comply with roofing manufacturer's requirements to maintain roofing warranty.
Install support pad beneath each support base.
Support Pads:

Remove rock, aggregate, dirt and excess dust from area to be covered by pad.
Apply support pad on cleaned area.
Center bases on top of support pads.

Install building attachments within concrete slabs or attach to structural steel. Space attachments within maximum piping span length indicated in MSS SP-69. Install additional attachments at concentrated loads, including valves, flanges, guides, strainers, and expansion joints, and at changes in direction of piping. Install concrete inserts before concrete is placed; fasten inserts to forms and install reinforcing bars through openings at top of inserts.

Install mechanical-anchor fasteners in concrete after concrete is placed and completely cured. Install fasteners according to manufacturer's written instructions.

Install hangers and supports complete with necessary inserts, bolts, rods, nuts, washers, and other accessories.

Install hangers and supports to allow controlled thermal and seismic movement of piping systems, to permit freedom of movement between pipe anchors, and to facilitate action of expansion joints, expansion loops, expansion bends, and similar units.

Load Distribution: Install hangers and supports so that piping live and dead loads and stresses from movement will not be transmitted to connected equipment.

Pipe Slopes: Install hangers and supports to provide indicated pipe slopes and so maximum pipe deflections allowed by ASME B31.9, "Building Services Piping," is not exceeded.

Install hangers for drawn-temper copper piping with the following maximum spacing and minimum rod sizes:

NPS 3/4 or Smaller: Maximum span, 5 feet; minimum rod size, 3/8 inch.
NPS 1: Maximum span, 6 feet; minimum rod size, 3/8 inch.
NPS 1-1/4: Maximum span, 8 feet; minimum rod size, 3/8 inch.
NPS 1-1/2: Maximum span, 8 feet; minimum rod size, 3/8 inch.
NPS 2: Maximum span, 8 feet; minimum rod size, 3/8 inch.
NPS 2-1/2: Maximum span, 9 feet; minimum rod size, 1/2 inch.
NPS 3: Maximum span, 10 feet; minimum rod size, 1/2 inch.
NPS 4: Maximum span, 12 feet; minimum rod size, 1/2 inch.
NPS 6: Maximum span, 14 feet; minimum rod size, 5/8 inch.

Install hangers for steel piping with the following maximum spacing and minimum rod sizes:

NPS 3/4 or Smaller: Maximum span, 7 feet; minimum rod size, 3/8 inch.
NPS 1: Maximum span, 7 feet; minimum rod size, 3/8 inch.
NPS 1-1/4: Maximum span, 8 feet; minimum rod size, 3/8 inch.
NPS 1-1/2: Maximum span, 9 feet; minimum rod size, 3/8 inch.


NPS 2: Maximum span, 10 feet; minimum rod size, 3/8 inch.
NPS 2-1/2: Maximum span, 11 feet; minimum rod size, 1/2 inch.
NPS 3: Maximum span, 12 feet; minimum rod size, 1/2 inch.
NPS 4: Maximum span, 14 feet; minimum rod size, 5/8 inch.
NPS 6: Maximum span, 17 feet; minimum rod size, 3/4 inch.
NPS 8: Maximum span, 19 feet; minimum rod size, 3/4 inch.
NPS 10: Maximum span, 22 feet; minimum rod size, 7/8 inch.
NPS 12: Maximum span, 23 feet; minimum rod size, 7/8 inch.
NSP 14: Maximum span, 25 feet; minimum rod size, 1 inch.

Install hangers for cast iron drainage piping minimum of one (1) hanger per pipe section close to joint on the barrel, at change of direction and at branch connections. Hanger and rod diameters for each pipe size shall be as indicated below.

NPS 1-1/2 and NPS 2: 60 inches with 3/8-inch rod.
NPS 3: 60 inches with 1/2-inch rod.
NPS 4 and NPS 5: 60 inches with 5/8-inch rod.
NPS 6: 60 inches with 3/4-inch rod.

Support cast-iron piping vertical runs at roof, at each floor, and at 10-foot intervals between floors.

Support vertical runs at roof, at each floor, and at 48 inches intervals between floors.

Pipe Slopes: Install hangers and supports to provide indicated pipe slopes and so maximum pipe deflections allowed by ASME B31.9, "Building Services Piping," are not exceeded.

Insulated Piping: Comply with the following:

Attach clamps and spacers to piping.

Piping not required with vapor retarder insulation: Clamp may project through insulation.
Piping required with vapor retarder insulation: Use thermal-hanger shield insert with clamp sized to match OD of insert.
Do not exceed pipe stress limits according to ASME B31.9.

ROOF MOUNTED EQUIPMENT SUPPORT

Equipment supports must be installed in accordance with instructions and as detailed on drawings.

Supports must span a minimum of two structural roof members.

No load shall be applied to cantilever exceeding 1’-0” in length.

Sizes and options shall be coordinated with the general and mechanical contractor prior to fabrication.

EQUIPMENT SUPPORTS

Fabricate structural-steel stands to suspend equipment from structure above or to support equipment above floor.

Grouting: Place grout under supports for equipment and make smooth bearing surface.

Provide lateral bracing, to prevent swaying, for equipment supports.

Roof mounted equipment supports.


METAL FABRICATION

Cut, drill, and fit miscellaneous metal fabrications for heavy-duty steel trapezes and equipment supports.

Fit exposed connections together to form hairline joints. Field-weld connections that cannot be shop- welded because of shipping size limitations.

Field Welding: Comply with AWS D1.1 procedures for shielded metal arc welding, appearance and quality of welds, and methods used in correcting welding work, and with the following:

Use materials and methods that minimize distortion and develop strength and corrosion resistance of base metals.
Obtain fusion without undercut or overlap.
Remove welding flux immediately.
Finish welds at exposed connections so no roughness shows after finishing and contours of welded surfaces match adjacent contours.

ADJUSTING

Hanger Adjustment: Adjust hangers to distribute loads equally on attachments and to achieve indicated slope of pipe.

Trim excess length of continuous-thread hanger and support rods to 1-1/2 inches.

PAINTING

Touching Up: Clean field welds and abraded areas of shop paint. Paint exposed areas immediately after erecting hangers and supports. Use same materials as used for shop painting. Comply with SSPC-PA 1 requirements for touching up field-painted surfaces.

Apply paint by brush or spray to provide a minimum dry film thickness of 2.0 mils.

Touching Up: Cleaning and touchup painting of field welds, bolted connections, and abraded areas of shop paint on miscellaneous metal are specified in Division 09 Section "Painting."

Galvanized Surfaces: Clean welds, bolted connections, and abraded areas and apply galvanizing-repair paint to comply with ASTM A 780.


END OF SECTION 20 0529


SECTION 20 0548 - VIBRATION CONTROL

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

Provide vibration control items for isolating vibration of mechanical equipment, piping and ductwork.

Provide isolators, bases, pads, sleeves, hangers and other devices specified, required, or detailed for the project. Include all vibration isolation system elements as recommended by the equipment manufacturer’s representative to ensure a complete, high performing and safe installation. Furnish and install all incidental materials required.

Items included in this section:

Flexible pipe connectors
Flexible metal hose
Inertia bases
Vibration isolators

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Work of this section shall be performed by suppliers and skilled tradesmen who are experienced in vibration control and mitigation to meet the requirements of this Section.

Provide field supervision and inspection to ensure proper installation, adjustment and performance. Replace any isolators that are found to resonate with the supported equipment.

Isolators shall be selected, installed and adjusted to prevent the transmission of objectionable vibration and noise to the building structure.

The size and number of mounts and hangers shall be chosen to meet these specifications, even if not specifically shown on the plans. Brackets, rails, bases, braces, etc., shall be provided as needed for a complete, high performing and safe installation.

SUBMITTALS

Product Data: For each type of product.

Include rated load, rated deflection, and overload capacity for each vibration isolation device.
Illustrate and indicate style, material, strength, fastening provision, and finish for each type and size of vibration isolation device required.

Shop Drawings:

Detail fabrication and assembly of equipment bases. Detail fabrication including anchorages and attachments to structure and to supported equipment. Include adjustable motor bases, rails, and frames for equipment mounting.
Vibration Isolation Base Details: Detail fabrication including anchorages and attachments to structure and to supported equipment. Include adjustable motor bases, rails, and frames for equipment mounting.


Delegated-Design Submittal: For each vibration isolation device.

Include design calculations for selecting vibration isolators and for designing vibration isolation bases.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

2.1

ACCEPTABLE MANUFACTURERS

A.
Subject to compliance with the Contract Documents, manufacturers for products specified in this Section shall be one of the following:


Vibration Eliminator Co.
Mason Industries, Inc.
Kinetics Noise Control
Vibration Mounting and Controls (VMC)
Korfund
Vibration Isolation Co.
Amber Booth
2.2

FLEXIBLE METAL HOSE CONNECTORS

A.
Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:


Metraflex
Flex Hose Co.
Flexonics
Mason Industries Inc.
Anaconda

B.
Provide metal hoses with length and end fittings as shown on drawings, with an inner corrugated hose made of type 304, 321, or 316 stainless steel and outer braid made of 304 stainless steel.

C.
For copper piping systems, use copper construction braided hoses.
2.3

FLEXIBLE PIPE CONNECTORS (RUBBER)

A.
Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:


Mason Industries Inc. Type SFDEJ
Metraflex Type DS

B.
Flexible connectors with neoprene and nylon type elements, with carbon steel or ductile iron floating flanges. Rated for 150 psig working pressure at 200ºF, with peroxide cured EPDM liner and cover, ultraviolet resistant, hand wrapped, non-molded, multiple arch body, with control rods or cables.
2.4

INERTIA BASES

A.
Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:


1.	Mason Industries, Inc.: Basis of design models noted below. Refer to Article 2.1 for approved equal manufacturers.


Type A: Model WFSL with unhoused spring isolators.
Type B: Model BMK/KSL with unhoused spring isolators.


All mounts shall have leveling bolts rigidly secured to the equipment being isolated.

Base Type A – Steel Inertia Base:

Shall be a structural steel base frame with clearance holes located to correspond to the mounting bolt holes of the equipment mounted on the base.
Bases shall have built-in motor slide rails and shall be reinforced as necessary to withstand belt pull without drive misalignment or base distortion. The bases shall be constructed with deep angle steel sections with a minimum vertical angle leg of 4 inches for motors of 7.5 hp or less, 5 inches for motors between 7.5 hp and 20 hp and 6 inches for motors over 20 hp.

Base Type B – Concrete Inertia Base:

Shall have an integral rectangular structural steel form into which concrete is poured. Perimeter members shall be beams of depth equal to 10% of the longest span of the base, but not more than 12 inches nor less than 6 inches deep. Forms shall include motor slide base and all reinforcing steel. Where anchor bolt locations fall in concrete, the reinforcing steel shall include drilled members with sleeves welded below the steel to accept the anchor bolts. Height saving steel brackets shall be used in all mounting locations.
When the concrete base in “T” shaped, isolators shall be located under the projections as well as under the main body in order to prevent cantilever distortion.

VIBRATION ISOLATORS

Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Mason Industries, Inc.: Basis of design models noted below. Refer to Article 2.1 for approved equal manufacturers.

Mounts:

Type 1: Model MSW
Type 2: Model ND
Type 3: Model SLF

Isolator Mounts:

Type 1:

Waffle Pads shall be 3/8-inch-thick neoprene pads ribbed or waffled on both sides. The pads shall be manufactured with quality neoprene and selected for a maximum durometer of
50 and designed for 15% strain. Where required, steel load-spreading plates shall be incorporated between the equipment and the neoprene pad.
If the isolator is bolted to the structure, a neoprene mounting sleeve shall be installed under the bolt head between the steel washer and the base plate.

Type 2:

Shall be laterally stable, double deflecting, molded neoprene isolators. All metal surfaces shall be covered with neoprene. The top and bottom surfaces shall be ribbed and bolt holes shall be provided in the base. The mounts shall have leveling bolts rigidly secured to the equipment.
The isolator shall be manufactured with bridge bearing quality neoprene and selected for a maximum durometer of 50 and designed for 15% strain. DDNM mounts shall be selected for a static deflection of 3/8 inch unless otherwise specified.


Type 3:


Shall have a free-standing and laterally stable steel spring without any housing. Springs shall be designed so that the ratio of the horizontal to vertical spring constant is between one and two. The spring diameter shall be not less than 80% of the compressed height of the spring at rated load. Loaded springs shall have a minimum additional travel to solid equal to 50% of the specified static deflection.
Unless otherwise specified, the minimum static deflection of Type 3 isolators for equipment mounted on grade slabs shall be 1 inch and for the minimum static deflection for equipment mounted above grade level shall be 2 inches.
Two Type 3 isolation pads sandwiching a 16 gauge stainless or galvanized steel separator plate shall be bounded to the isolator baseplate.
Unless otherwise specified, isolators need not be bolted to the floor for indoor installations. If the base plates are bolted to the structure, a neoprene mounting sleeve shall be installed under the bolt head between the steel washer and the base plate.

Type 4:

Laterally stable, restrained spring type with housings and heavy top plates for supporting the equipment and resisting seismic and wind loading. Spring isolators shall be comprised of two interfacing but independent elements; a coil spring element and a seismically rated housing. Housings and springs shall be powder coated and hardware galvanized. The spring coil element shall be comprised of one or more coil assemblies having all of the characteristics of freestanding coil spring isolators.
The seismically rated housing shall be sized to meet or exceed the force requirements applicable to the project and have the capability of accepting coils of various sizes, capacities, and deflections as required to meet the desired isolation criteria. All spring forces will be contained within the coil/housing assembly and under no seismic load condition shall the restraint anchoring hardware be exposed to spring generated forces. Top plate and restraining bolts shall be out of contact with the housing during normal operation.
The restraint element shall incorporate a steel housing with elastomeric elements at all dynamic contact points. The restraint will allow a maximum of 1/4 in. (25 mm) motion in any direction from the neutral position. All elastomeric elements shall be replaceable.
The leveling nut or screw shall be accessible for adjustment with the use of a pneumatic or electric impact wrench. The spring element shall be replaceable without having to lift or otherwise remove the supported equipment.

PART 3 - EXECUTION

GENERAL

All equipment mounted on vibration isolators shall have a minimum operating clearance of 1 inch between the bottom of the equipment or inertia base and the concrete housekeeping pad (or bolt heads) beneath the equipment.

Provide a minimum of 4 inches between isolated equipment and the walls, ceiling, floors, columns and any other equipment not installed on vibration isolators.

Piping, ductwork, conduit or mechanical equipment shall not be hung from or supported on other equipment, pipes, or ductwork installed on vibration isolators.

Vibration isolator sizes and layout shall be determined by the vibration isolator supplier


Equipment connected to water or other fluid piping shall be erected on isolators or isolated foundations at correct operating heights prior to connection of piping. Equipment should be blocked-up with temporary shims to final operating height. When the system is assembled and fluid is added, the isolators shall be adjusted to allow removal of the shims.

All mechanical equipment not specifically identified in this specification that contains rotating or vibrating elements shall be installed on Mount Type 2 neoprene isolators as appropriate. Provide supporting steel structure between isolators and equipment if isolator does not readily connect to equipment.

All equipment and their respective isolators shall be directly mounted on primary steel. Units and isolators shall not be mounted on resiliently supported steel cabinets or plenum floors or other flexible construction.

Roof mounted fans or roof top units shall be installed on a curb mounted base.

All wiring connections to mechanical equipment on vibration isolators (either spring or neoprene type) shall be made with a minimum 36-inch-long flexible conduit. Coordinate wiring connections with the Electrical Installer.

APPLICATION TABLES


Floor Mounted Equipment Type
Slab on Grade
Floor Span Up to 30 Feet
Floor Span 30 to 40 Feet
Base Type
Isolator Type
Base Type
Isolator Type
Base Type
Isolator Type
Chillers:






Air Cooled
None
Mount 1
None
Mount 1
None
Mount 1
Pumps:






Base Mounted < 7.5 HP
None
Mount 3
B
Mount 3
B
Mount 3
All Others
None
Mount 3
B
Mount 3
B
Mount 3

“Floor Span”: Defined as the distance between centers of floor joists.

BASE MOUNTED PUMPS

Any rigid pipe elbows at the pump suction and discharge connections shall be supported from the inertia base. All pipe connections shall be with a flexible pipe connector.

PIPES WITH MULTIPLE CONNECTIONS

Where a pipe run connects multiple items of equipment in the Mechanical Room the pipe hanger isolators for the entire run shall be chosen to suit the connected equipment of greatest static deflection.


END OF SECTION 20 0548


SECTION 20 0553 – MECHANICAL IDENTIFICATION

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 1 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

Provide Mechanical system identification for piping, valves, ductwork, architectural access panels and equipment.

QUALITY ASSURANCE

ASME Compliance: Comply with ASME A13.1, "Scheme for the Identification of Piping Systems," for letter size, length of color field, colors, and viewing angles of identification devices for piping.

SUBMITTALS

Product Data: For each type of product indicated.

Equipment Label Schedule: Include a listing of all equipment to be labeled with the proposed content for each label

Valve numbering scheme.

Valve Schedules: For each piping system to include in maintenance manuals.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

ACCEPTABLE MANUFACTURERS

Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Brady Company
Brimer
Craftmark
MSI (Marking Services Incorporated)
Seton Name Plate Corporation

PIPE MARKERS

Manufacturer's standard, pre-printed, color-coded, plastic pipe markers, complying with ANSI A13.1, and requirements below. Self-adhesive markers are not acceptable.

For pipe diameter (with insulation) less than 6": full-band, semi-rigid, snap-on pipe markers, extending 360 degrees around pipe.

For pipe diameter (with insulation) of 6" and larger: full-band or strip-type pipe markers, but not narrower than 3 times letter height. Fasten with nylon or stainless steel bands for pipe 6" through 12". Fastened with stainless steel bands for piping over 12".

Lettering: Standard nomenclature which best describes piping system, as selected by Engineer (in cases of variance from table below).


Arrows: Pipe marker arrows indicating direction of flow, either integrally with piping system lettering, or as a separate marker.

Identify contents of piping by both fluid contained and unique temperature and /or pressure (if necessary, to distinguish between other systems with same fluid at different conditions); e.g. Potable Hot Water - 110F vs Potable Hot Water – 140F

Use the following color coding and nomenclature for pipe markers:

Piping System	Label I.D.	Letter and Label Color
1.	Cold Water, Domestic
CW
White on Green
2.	Chilled Water Supply
CHWS
White on Green
3.	Chilled Water Return
CHWR
White on Green

Underground Pipe Markers: Manufacturer's standard, permanent, bright-colored plastic tape, intended for direct-burial service, 6" wide x 4 mils thick, continuously printed to indicate service of buried pipe. For plastic pipe, provide label with detectable nonferrous locator.

EQUIPMENT MARKERS

Engraved plastic equipment markers for all scheduled equipment, (eg., chillers, pumps, air handling units, heat exchangers, fans, etc.). Indicate equipment mark and service, (eg. EF-1 Serving Toilet Rms 2035 & 2036; CHWP-1 Serving CH-1; AHU-1 Serving Flr 1 Offices) nominal capacity (tons, cfm or gpm). Scale marker and lettering to equipment labeled. White lettering on black background.

VALVE TAGS

1-1/2" diameter brass valve tags with 1/4" stamp-engraved designations with piping system abbreviation and sequenced valve numbers. Provide solid brass chain, or solid brass S-hooks of the size and type required for proper attachment of tags to valves.

PART 3 - EXECUTION

GENERAL INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS

Coordination: Install identification after insulation is applied. Protect identification from paint or apply after painting is complete. Install above ceiling identification prior to acoustical ceilings.

Attachment: Securely attach all mechanical identification to associated pipe, duct, panels and equipment. Locate identification to be readily visible.

PIPING SYSTEM IDENTIFICATION

Install pipe markers on all piping systems in spaces where piping is exposed, concealed only by removable ceiling system, and where accessible at manholes and access panels.

Locate pipe markers near points where piping continues into shafts, underground, floor or wall; at 25' spacing along exposed runs (15' in congested areas), at valves, equipment and control devices, and where there could be question of flow pattern.

Install marker over pipe insulation segment on hot non-insulated pipes.


UNDERGROUND PIPING IDENTIFICATION

During back-filling, install continuous underground pipe markers over all buried piping, 6" to 8" below finished grade. Where multiple pipes are in a trench up to 16" wide, install single line marker. For tile fields and similar installations, mark only edge pipe lines of field.

DUCTWORK IDENTIFICATION

Install duct markers on all supply, return, exhaust, intake and relief ductwork where duct is exposed, concealed only by removable ceiling system, and where accessible at access panels.

Locate duct markers near points where ductwork originates or continues into shafts, floor or wall, and at 25' spacing along exposed runs.

Install duct access door markers on all access doors. Access doors for fire or smoke dampers shall be permanently identified on the exterior by a label having minimum 0.5 inch high lettering reading: FIRE/SMOKE DAMPER, SMOKE DAMPER or FIRE DAMPER.

EQUIPMENT IDENTIFICATION

Provide equipment markers on scheduled equipment.

VALVE IDENTIFICATION

Install valve tags on all new valves, except for check valves, valves within factory-fabricated equipment, plumbing fixture faucets, hose bibs, and valves located directly at the equipment served. Number valves in a logical sequence relative to location installed.

List each tagged valve in valve schedule for each piping system. Include a copy of the valve tag schedule in the Operation and Maintenance manuals and mount a laminated copy as directed by the Owner.

Where building has previously tagged valves, coordinate numbering with old schedule, and note changes made to previously tagged valves on new schedule.

ADJUSTING

Relocate mechanical identification materials and devices that have become visually blocked by other work.

CLEANING

Clean faces of mechanical identification devices and glass frames of valve schedules.


END OF SECTION 20 0553


SECTION 20 0700 - MECHANICAL SYSTEMS INSULATION

PART 1 - GENERAL

1.1

RELATED DOCUMENTS

A.
Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.
1.2

SUMMARY

A.
This Section includes:


Piping insulation materials and installation methods
Ductwork insulation materials and installation methods
Mechanical equipment insulation materials and installation methods
Ductwork acoustical lining materials and installation methods
Ductwork fire wrap materials and installation methods
1.3

ASBESTOS ABATEMENT

A.
All asbestos within the contract bounds shall be removed per the requirements described in Division 02. Refer to drawings for items containing asbestos insulation. Re-insulate all piping, ductwork and equipment to remain from which asbestos has been removed.
1.4

QUALITY ASSURANCE

A.
Installer Qualifications: Skilled mechanics who have successfully completed an apprenticeship program or another craft training program certified by the Department of Labor, Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training.

B.
Codes and Standards


1.	ASHRAE 90.1-2013

DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING

Packaging: Ship insulation materials in containers marked by manufacturer with appropriate ASTM specification designation, type and grade, and maximum use temperature.

Protect materials against weather and contact with damp or wet surfaces from time of delivery through time of installation. Store materials inside under cover and keep them dry and protected against damage from weather, condensation, direct sunlight, construction traffic, and other causes.

Deliver materials only when environmental conditions meet requirements specified for installation areas. If materials must be stored in other than installation areas, store only where environmental conditions meet requirements specified for installation areas.

Do not store materials near other materials that may off-gas or emit harmful fumes, such as kerosene heaters, fresh paint, adhesives, etc.

When storing prior to installation, raise off floor on pallets, stack flat with protective material between to eliminate chance of creating nicks, scratches, and other imperfections and damage to finish surfaces, wrap weather-tight, and provide for air circulation within and around stacks and under temporary coverings.


Do not allow materials to become damp. Maintain temperatures at 60°F or higher, and humidity between 20% and 60% prior to, during and after installation.

SUBMITTALS

Product Data: Submit schedule indicating product used, where it is used, and thickness. For each type of product indicated, include thermal conductivity, water-vapor permeance, thickness, and jackets (both factory and field applied if any).

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

GENERAL INSULATION REQUIREMENTS

Surface-Burning Characteristics: For insulation and related materials, as determined by testing identical products according to ASTM E 84, by a testing and inspecting agency acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction. Factory label insulation and jacket materials and adhesive, mastic, tapes, and cement material containers, with appropriate markings of applicable testing agency.

Insulation Installed Indoors: Flame-spread index of 25 or less, and smoke-developed index of 50 or less.
Insulation Installed Outdoors: Flame-spread index of 75 or less, and smoke-developed index of 150 or less.

Insulation thermal conductivity: No greater than value listed, in Btu-inch/hour-square foot-degrees F at 75 degrees F mean temperature.

Water Vapor Permeance (ASTM E97 or E96, Procedure A): No greater than value listed, in perms. Water vapor permeability (ASTM C355): No greater than value listed, in perm-inch.

Puncture resistance (ASTM D781): No less than value listed

Flame spread classification (ASTM E84, NFPA 255): No greater than value listed. Smoke density classification (ASTM E84, NFPA 255): No greater than value listed. Composite listing includes insulation, jacket, and adhesive.

Density no less than value listed, in pounds per cubic foot.

PIPING INSULATION – FIBERGLASS

Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Johns-Manville; Micro-Lok HP
Knauf; Earthwool 1000
Owens/Corning; ASJ/SSL-II

Fiberglass insulation with factory-applied vapor barrier jacket with self-sealing laps. ASTM C547 Class 1 insulation, conductivity of 0.23 at 75F. Vapor barrier jacket: laminated white kraft paper, aluminum foil, glass fiber reinforcement, water vapor permeance of 0.02 perms, and puncture resistance of 50 units. Composite flame spread/ smoke density of 25/50.

PIPING INSULATION - CLOSED CELL ELASTOMERIC

Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Armacell; AP Armaflex


Aeroflex; Aerocel
K-Flex; INSUL-TUBE

Flexible closed cell elastomeric pipe insulation, ASTM C534, conductivity of 0.25, water vapor permeability of 0.20, composite flame spread/ smoke density of 25/50.

PIPING INSULATION SPECIALTIES

PVC Jackets: Provide pre-molded, high impact, 20 mil thickness, UV resistant, 0-150F service temperature.

Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Zeston
Proto

Aluminum Jackets: Provide 0.016” thick alloy 3003 aluminum jacketing with longitudinal lock seam and butt strap circumferential joints.

Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Childers
Pabco

Removable Insulation Jackets: Provide removable insulation jackets with fiberglass insulation, flexible fabric jacket and Velcro fasteners.

Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Advance Thermal Corp
Q Master

EQUIPMENT INSULATION – CLOSED CELL ELASTOMERIC SHEET

Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Armacell AP Armaflex Sheet Insulation
Aeroflex; Aerocel
K-Flex; INSUL-SHEET

Closed cell elastomeric insulation sheet. ASTM C534, conductivity of 0.25, water vapor permeability of
0.05 perm-inch, composite flame spread/ smoke density of 25/50.

Elastomeric insulation sheet contact adhesive.

Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Armacell; Armaflex 520 Adhesive
Aeroflex; Aeroseal
K-Flex

SEALING MASTICS FOR PIPE AND DUCT INSULATION

Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Childers


Foster
Vimasco
Mon-Eco Industries

Provide mastics to seal insulation joints and to provide a continuous vapor barrier. The permeance of the mastic shall be equal to or less than the permeance of the vapor barrier of the insulation it is applied to. The ASTM E84 flame spread and smoke density classification shall not exceed 25/50. Mastics shall be mercury and asbestos free, selected for the temperature range of the service, and selected for uses recommended by the manufacturer. Mastics used outdoors shall be outdoor rated, waterproof, and U.V. resistant.

PART 3 - EXECUTION

INSULATION GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

Insulate piping, ductwork and equipment unless indicated as not to be insulated in subsequent paragraphs.

Re-insulate items from which asbestos insulation was removed.

Insulate connection points between new and existing items.

Repair or replace insulation damaged during construction.

Provide fire rated duct wrap insulation where indicated on the drawings per specifications in this Section

All systems shall be tested and approved before being insulated.

The insulation shall be applied over clean, dry surface.

Full lengths of insulation shall be used except at end of straight sections and as required to accommodate fittings. Insulation shall be applied with the joints tightly fitted together. Cracks or voids shall be filled with insulation. The edges and seams at all visible locations shall be finished in a neat and workmanlike manner. Manufacturer's recommended installation procedures shall be strictly adhered to.

PIPING INSULATION THICKNESS TABLE

Minimum insulation thickness in inches, shall comply with the table below for the associated piping system and pipe sizes. Values are based on an R value of 4 per inch thickness. Overall conductance shall comply with ASHRAE 90.1

System Description
Temp Range Deg F
<1”
Thru 1- 1/4”
Thru 3”
Thru 6”
8” & above
Cold Water & Coil Condensate
Any
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
Chilled Water
Any
0.5
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.5

PIPING INSULATION APPLICATION

Piping-Indoor:

Type: Fiberglass
Thickness: See Piping Insulation Thickness Table
Jacket: Factory ASJ


Piping-Outdoor:

Type: Fiberglass or Closed Cell Elastomeric
Thickness:

For outdoor piping systems with fluid temperature above 200 deg F, apply insulation 1/2" thicker than listed in Piping Insulation Thickness Table
For outdoor piping systems with fluid temperature at or below 200 deg F, apply insulation in the same thicknesses listed in Piping Insulation Thickness Table

Jacket: PVC if not indicated on drawings to be Aluminum

Piping Items not to be Insulated:

Unions
Flexible connectors, flexible metal hose, flexible neoprene hose
Control valves 2” and smaller
Safety valves
Discharge vent piping
Vacuum breakers
Thermostatic vent valves
Steam traps 3/4” and smaller
Sanitary, waste and vent piping
Compressed air piping
Natural gas piping
Lab vacuum piping
Refrigerant liquid lines
Vertical portion of rain water conductors
Condenser/Cooling tower water piping (unless it is used for winter time water side economizer)
Below-grade piping, unless otherwise indicated
Chrome-plated pipes and fittings, unless potential for personnel injury
Air Chambers

At fittings and flanges, insulate with wrapped fiberglass insulation of same thickness as adjacent pipe, and cover with pre-molded PVC jackets. Seal edge of jacket with self-sealing vapor barrier tape.

For valves, strainers, suction diffusers and other accessories that require maintenance: In hot piping, insulate similar to fittings and flanges. In cold piping, insulate with closed cell elastomeric insulation, installed to be removable for maintenance access.

Wherever necessary to seal insulation and provide a complete and continuous vapor barrier, apply two coats of insulating mastic

For closed cell elastomeric insulation, seal all butt joints and seams by joining cut edges with adhesive as supplied by the insulation manufacturer

Expansion Joints Insulation: Expansion joints shall be insulated with prefabricated insulation blankets, installed in a manner to allow for the repacking of the joints without removing blanket. Hold blankets in place with permanently attached Velcro fasteners

Removable Insulation Jackets: Where indicated on drawings, provide removable insulation jackets.

COLD EQUIPMENT INSULATION APPLICATION

Cold Equipment Insulation

Type: Closed Cell Elastomeric Sheet


Thickness: 1”
Jacket: None for indoor equipment, PVC for outdoor equipment

Insulate all equipment with surface temperature below 60F.

Apply elastomeric insulation sheet with contact adhesive

Cold Equipment Not To Be Insulated:

Water softener shells
Vacuum pumps
Factory insulated equipment
Vibration-control devices


END OF SECTION 20 0700


SECTION 20 1100 - PLUMBING AND HVAC PIPING

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

This Section specifies pipe materials, fittings, joining methods, piping specialties and installation methods. In addition, pressure testing and flushing/cleaning procedures are outlined.

Plumbing piping systems
Hydronic piping systems
Steam and condensate piping systems
Refrigerant piping systems
Pipe joints
Mechanically formed tee connections in copper piping
Unions
Pipe sleeves
Dielectric fittings
Strainers
Pipe anchors
Piping transitions
Pipe sleeve seal systems

SUBMITTALS

Product Data: Include manufacturer, catalog illustrations, model, rated capacities, performance, dimensions, component sizes, rough-in requirements, materials of construction, and operating and maintenance clearance requirements. Additionally include:

Provide a piping material schedule that indicates, by service, pipe material, pipe manufacturer, fitting type and manufacturer, joint type and manufacturer.
Solder and brazing material data sheets.
Grooved fittings, couplings, and accessories data sheets.
Data sheets for all products listed in this section including fittings, flanges and gaskets.
For underground pressurized and steam condensate piping systems, provide a simplified drawing of the piping system identifying pipe depth and slope, location and type of each joint and restraint, valve, and similar accessories, and dimensions of any expansion loops

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Manufacturers and Products: The products and manufacturers specified in this Section establish the standard of quality for the Work. Subject to compliance with all requirements, provide specified products from the manufacturers named in Part 2.

Reference Standards: Products in this section shall be built, tested, and installed in compliance with the specified quality assurance standards; latest editions, unless noted otherwise.

All piping, (including vacuum piping), unless noted otherwise, shall comply with ANSI Standard B31.9 - Building Service Piping.
All steam piping above 15 psig, and all steam condensate piping shall comply with ANSI Standard B31.1 - Power Piping.


National Sanitation Foundation NSF/ANSI-61, including Annex G (listed as ≤ 0.25% weighted average lead content)(and/or NSF/ANSI-372)and Annex F. Applies to any item in contact with domestic (potable) water.
U.S. Safe Drinking Water Act (any item in contact with domestic (potable) water)
AWWA C600 Standard for Installation of Ductile-Iron Water Mains and their Appurtenances.
AWWA C606 Grooved and Shouldered Joints.
Mill certifications indicating country of origin and compliance to ASTM/ANSI/NSF and other required compliance standards verified by independent third party based in the United States shall be promptly provided whenever requested.
NFPA 54 - National Fuel Gas Code

Regulatory Requirements For Refrigerant Piping Systems: Comply with provisions of the following codes:

ANSI B31.5: ASME Code for Pressure Piping - Refrigerant Piping.
ANSI/ASHRAE Standard 15: Safety Code for Mechanical Refrigeration.
ASHRAE Standard 34: Number Designation and Safety Classification of Refrigerants.
EPA requirements in Section 608: Prohibition of Venting and Regulation of CFC Requirements.
UL Standard: Provide products complying with UL 207, "Refrigerant-Containing Components and Accessories, Nonelectrical"; or UL 429, "Electrically Operated Valves”.

Regulatory Requirements For Natural Gas Piping Systems: Comply with provisions of the following codes:

Comply with the requirements of NFPA 54 - National Fuel Gas Code, for gas piping materials and components, and gas piping systems installation, inspection, testing, and purging.

Regulatory Requirements For Steam and Condensate Piping Systems: Comply with provisions of the following codes:

Welding: Qualify processes and operators according to the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code: Section IX, "Welding and Brazing Qualifications”.
ASME Compliance: Comply with ASME B31.1, "Power Piping," for materials, products, and installation. Safety valves and pressure vessels shall bear the appropriate ASME label. Fabricate and stamp flash tanks to comply with the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Section VIII, Division 1

DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING

Store piping materials and accessories off the floor/ground on pallets and protected with coverings to prevent damage or contamination due to weather and construction activities. Provide temporary protective caps on pipe ends. Maintain caps installed at all times until just prior to assembly, and recap open pipe ends at the conclusion of each work day. Store in areas that prevent damage due to freezing and extreme temperatures or sunlight. Arrange coverings to provide air circulation to avoid damage from condensation or chemical build-up. Protect from damage, dirt and debris at all times.

WARRANTY

Provide a complete warranty for parts and labor for a minimum of one year from the date of Substantial Completion.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

GENERAL PIPING REQUIREMENTS

See Part 3 for application of piping type and material.


All piping materials shall be compatible for temperature, pressure and service.

Provide long radius elbows and returns on welded steel pipe.

PIPE JOINTS

Soldered Joints: ASTM B32; Alloy Sb5, (95% Tin, 5% Antimony, maximum 0.20% Lead). When recommended by the component manufacturer, use manufacturer’s recommended flux. Unless noted otherwise, joints may be screwed or flanged to suit valves and equipment. Manufacturers: Engelehard “Silverbrite 100”, Harris “Bridgit”

Brazed Joints: ASTM B32, silver brazed joints with 1000F minimum melting point, conforming to AWS - A5.8, “Specification for brazing filler metal”. Classification BAg-1. For domestic potable water applications, maintain a nitrogen purge during brazing to prevent deposit formation inside the pipe. Unless noted otherwise, joints may be screwed or flanged to suit valves and equipment. Manufacturers: Lucas-Milhaupt Inc. “Sil-Fos”, J.W. Harris “Stay-Silv 15” and “Safety Silv”

Screwed Joints: Tapered thread, ASME B1.20.1, joined with compatible compound or sealant tape applied to male thread only.

Welded Joints: Comply with Section II, Part C, ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code for welding materials appropriate for the wall thickness and chemical analysis of the pipe being welded. Pipe and fittings shall be beveled and butt welded.

Grooved Joints - for Copper Piping, maximum pipe size 8”: Rolled grooves, peroxide cured EPDM gaskets, ductile iron housing (ASTM A 532 or A 536), wrought copper (ASTM B 75, ANSI B16.22) or cast bronze fittings, rated for minimum 300 psi working pressure at 250ºF, when used with grooves that comply with AWWA C606. Grooved system/components shall provide rigid installation. UL and UPC approved. Utilize manufacturer’s recommended gasket lubricant. Brazed Class 150 ANSI B16.24 cast bronze flanges (or copper companion flange by CTS Fabrication USA) must be used at any component requiring a flanged connection. Clamp-on branch outlets are prohibited. Exact gasket material and style shall be as recommended by the coupling manufacturer for the service, and NSF/ANSI-61 Annex G and NSF/ANSI- 372 listed when used for potable water. On potable water service, provide non-standard gasket styles that close off and isolate gasket cavities from the water in the pipe. The manufacturer of the couplings and the fittings shall be the same. The same grooved component manufacturer shall be provided for the entire scope of the work, for each system.

The following manufacturers and coupling model numbers are permitted, provided they comply with all the above: Victaulic Style 607; Tyco Grinnell 672 or 640.
For copper piping in utility tunnels: Victaulic Style 607 only.

Grooved Joints - for Steel Piping, for maximum pipe size of 12”: Rolled or cut grooves, peroxide cured EPDM gaskets, ductile iron coupling and fittings (ASTM A532 or A536), rated for minimum 400 psi working pressure at 250ºF, when used with grooves that comply with AWWA C606. Grooved system/components shall provide rigid installation. UL and FM approved. Utilize manufacturer’s recommended gasket lubricant. Welded flanges must be used at any component requiring a flanged connection. Clamp-on branch outlets are prohibited. Exact gasket material and style shall be as recommended by the coupling manufacturer for the service. The manufacturer of the couplings and the fittings shall be the same. The same grooved component manufacturer shall be provided for the entire scope of the work, for each system.

The following manufacturers and coupling model numbers are permitted, provided they comply with all the above: Victaulic Style 07 or 107; Tyco Grinnell Fig. 740 or 772.

Flanged Joints:

Select flange and gasket materials to suit service of piping and to comply with the respective ASME B31.1 or B31.9 piping standard.


For steel pipe, provide raised face ANSI B16.5 compliant steel flanges.
For copper pipe, provide Class 150 flat face ANSI B16.24 cast bronze flanges, brazed to the copper tube.

Alternative: Copper companion flange by CTS Fabrication USA rated 450 PSI minimum working pressure from -66ºF to 272ºF. ANSI B16.5 compliant, powder coated, with an EPDM insulator adhered to the plate steel flange protruding inside of the flange to prevent contact with the copper companion flange adapter. Flange adapter shall be manufactured to ASME B16.22, brazed to the copper tube.

Gaskets shall conform to respective ANSI Standards, A21.11, B16.20, B16.21. Gaskets in steam and condensate lines shall be “FLEXTALLIC”, 316 L stainless steel with “FLEXICARB” filler. Flange gaskets for domestic hot water shall be 100% PTFE. For butterfly valves on replaceable seat side with interfering set-screws, provide Garlock Style 9800.
Flange Bolts and Nuts: ASME B18.2.1, carbon steel, unless otherwise indicated. Central Power Plant and Tunnels: Provide ASTM A193 B7 bolts and studs with ASTM A194 grade 2H heavy hex nuts.

Gasket Joint Lubricant - for use with grooved and hubless joints: Provide manufacturer’s recommended gasket lubricant.

Solvent Cement Joints: Select materials suitable for pipe materials joined and compatible with fluid served. Conform to respective ASTM Standards D-2235, D-2564, D-2855 and D-3138.

MECHANICALLY FORMED TEE CONNECTIONS IN COPPER PIPING

Contractor may use mechanically formed Tee connections in copper piping in lieu of tee fitting only where main piping is 2 1/2" or larger and where branch connection is 3/4" or smaller. Joint must be brazed. Tool manufacturer: T-Drill.

UNIONS

Unions in steel piping systems shall be malleable iron with ground joints made between two bronze inserts.

Unions in copper piping systems shall be wrought copper or brass with sweat ends.

PIPE SLEEVES

Provide pipe sleeves where required, including the following locations:

Where required by code
Where required as part of rated penetration, to maintain fire and smoke rating
To support vertical piping (to support riser clamps)
Where required to maintain water seal and prevent water penetration
Where pipe movement is anticipated (especially due to thermal expansion) at the penetration

Chilled water and cold water: Sleeves are required for all piping 2” and larger penetrating walls and floors.

DIELECTRIC FITTINGS

For pipe 2 inch and less: Provide brass coupling. (Dielectric unions are not acceptable).

For pipe 2-1/2 inch and larger: Provide flange union with dielectric gasket and bolt sleeves. On copper pipe, copper companion flanges by CTS Fabrication USA shall be used.

Dielectric waterways are prohibited for all joint systems.


STRAINERS

Body shall be bronze, cast steel or cast iron, to match piping materials. Strainers shall be same size as piping, with screwed connections on piping 2” and smaller, and flanged connections on piping 2-1/2” and larger. Where grooved piping is specified, grooved joint strainers may be used. Screen free area shall be a minimum of twice the internal cross sectional area of the piping where installed. Pressure rating shall be that of piping system, minimum Class 125. Provide 3/4” ball valve blow down with hose end connection on all strainers 2” and larger.

Approved Manufacturers: Armstrong, Anvil International, Keckley, Metraflex, Mueller, Spirax-Sarco, Victaulic, Watts, Yarway.

FLEXIBLE PIPING CONNECTORS

Refer to Section 22 0548 Vibration Control

PIPE ANCHORS

Provide pipe anchors where shown and as detailed on drawings.

PIPING TRANSITIONS

For dissimilar metal connections, see “Dielectric Fittings”.

When two different pipe materials must be joined such as cast iron, clay, steel, copper or plastic, provide transition fittings specifically designed for that purpose and that are manufactured in compliance with the standards relevant for the pipes joined. Transitions shall have equal corrosion resistance to the pipes joined.

PIPE SLEEVE SEAL SYSTEMS

Approved Manufacturers:

EnPro Industries “Link Seal”
Advance Products & Systems, Inc.
Metraflex Company.
Proco Products, Inc.

Description: Modular sealing-element unit, designed for field assembly, for filling annular space between piping and sleeve. Shall provide a water-proof seal between the pipe and sleeve at up to 20 psig head pressure. Each link and pressure plate shall include permanent identification of size and manufacturer's name. Manufactured in an approved ISO-9001:2000 facility.

Sealing Elements: EPDM-rubber interlocking links shaped to fit surface of pipe.

Pressure Plates: Molded of glass reinforced nylon.

Connecting Bolts and Nuts: Mild steel with a 60,000 psi minimum tensile strength and 2-part Zinc Dichromate coating per ASTM B-633 and Organic Coating, tested in accordance with ASTM B-117 to pass a 1,500-hour salt spray test. Of length required to secure pressure plates to sealing elements.

Sleeves:

Galvanized steel, ASTM A53/A53M, Schedule 40, with plain ends and welded steel collar, zinc coated. Steel Sleeve sizes 12” and larger shall be 0.375” thick or standard pipe wall thickness. Sleeves through wall shall be cast in place and the pipe shall be installed centered in the sleeve.


Provide 2” collar (water-stop) of steel to match sleeve, welded all around on both sides to the sleeve at the point on the sleeve that positions it at the mid-point of the structural wall when the sleeve is in place.
Molded non-metallic high density polyethylene sleeves (HDPE) with integral hollow, molded water- stop ring four inches larger than the outside diameter of the sleeve itself. End caps and reinforcing ribs, manufactured in an approved ISO-9001:2000 facility.

PART 3 - EXECUTION

GENERAL PIPING INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS

Work shall be done in accordance with applicable ordinances and codes. Arrange for inspections.

For domestic potable water applications, maintain a nitrogen purge during brazing to prevent deposit formation inside the pipe, so that the inner pipe surface remains clean. Properly ventilate the area outside the pipe to avoid unsafe levels of nitrogen.

Install pipe components and joining systems in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.

Install piping to permit complete draining. Provide capped hose end ball type drain valves at all low points.

If water (flushing water, blow down, etc.) or hydronic system fluids have a pH between 5.0 and 10.0 and meet the requirements of the local municipality Sewer Use Ordinance, it may be discharged to the sanitary sewer. If the water does not meet the sewer discharge limits, then provide for alternate disposal means approved by local and state jurisdictions.

Installed piping shall be free from sagging. Provide for expansion and contraction of piping in an approved and safe manner by means of loops or offsets, where mechanical expansion joints are not specifically called for.

Branch connections from horizontal steam, steam condensate, and gaseous system mains shall be taken off the top, up at a 45 degree angle, or off the side.

Branch connections from horizontal hydronic system mains shall not be taken off the main bottom, or at less than 45 degrees from horizontal.

Branch piping shall be valved at the branch connection points.

Provide fittings and specialties necessary to properly interconnect all items, whether or not shown in detail.

Piping shall remain protected and capped until just prior to connection. Immediately after assembly, restore all protection and cap unprotected ends to prevent odors, dust, moisture, and other debris from entering the piping system.

Clean and swab-out all piping before installation.

Lay out pipe lines straight, plumb and in true alignment. Offset as required to avoid interference with other work, to conceal piping, to allow maximum headroom and to avoid interference with windows and doors. Lay out all pipes and establish their levels from bench marks, existing floors or finished grades.

Piping shall be concealed unless indicated otherwise on drawings. Do not conceal piping until it has been inspected, tested, flushed and approved.

Use eccentric reducing fittings to increase or decrease pipe sizes. Bushings are not acceptable. Orient reducers to prevent trapping of water.


Lubricate flange bolts and install with hardened flat washers. Use a torque wrench to tighten flange bolts to the gasket manufacturer’s recommended torque.

Locate groups of pipe parallel to each other, spaced to permit applying insulation and servicing of valves. Install hot and cold water lines at least 6 inches apart.

Install piping at least 3 inches clear of electrical conduit. Do not install pipe within the National Electrical Code (NEC) working space zone of electrical equipment. Examples:

Above the footprint of electrical equipment in the zone extending 6’ above the installed height of the equipment.
Within the NEC working space in front of the electrical equipment. NEC working space varies depending on voltage and other factors. Typically for equipment 600 volts or less it extends from the floor to the height of the equipment or 6’-6”, whichever greater, 3’-6” in front of the equipment, and for the width of the equipment or 30”, whichever is greater.
Verify NEC clearance requirements prior to installing work. Note that variable frequency drives are considered electrical equipment.

Pipe extending into finished areas shall have chrome plated escutcheons large enough to cover pipe sleeves and shall fit snugly over pipe or insulation.

Pitch piping as follows, but not less than required by code:

Hydronic piping up in direction of flow at 1/16” per foot
Steam piping down in direction of flow at 1/16” per foot
Vent piping back toward waste at 1/16” per foot
Waste, condensate and compressed air piping down in direction of flow at 1/8” per foot.

Join hubless, cast-iron soil piping according to CISPI 310 and CISPI's "Cast Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings Handbook" for hubless-piping coupling joints.

Support vertical pipe at no less than every floor level, at the base of each riser, and at every riser offset.
Support horizontal pipe 5" diameter and greater with a minimum of two pipe hangers between couplings, except sections of pipe less than 4 feet in developed length are permitted to be supported with no less than one hanger between couplings.
All horizontal piping 5" diameter and greater shall be restrained or braced to prevent movement at each joint at every direction change and at each branch connection.
Provide pipe hangers to support every horizontal branch connection; provide sway bracing when pipe is suspended in excess of 18" by non-rigid hangers, and comply with all other bracing, support, and installation recommendations and suggestions in the CISPI Handbook.
Provide hangers and supports to eliminate all misalignment at couplings.
Tighten all clamps to coupling manufacturer's recommended torque, using a torque wrench.
Joints between dissimilar pipe materials shall be restrained

Sanitary and storm piping shall be anchored upstream of the first coupling at the point of building exit (interior side) to prevent movement due to back surges, by permanent blocks, bracing, threaded rodding anchored to the exterior wall, or other suitable means.

Pipe Sleeves: Furnish and set pipe sleeves per details on drawings

Pipe Anchors: Furnish and install pipe anchors where shown and as detailed on drawings


PLUMBING PIPING SYSTEMS APPLICATION

Domestic Cold Water, Hot Water and Hot Water Return - Above Ground (including non-potable)

For piping through 6”:

Pipe: Type L Copper, hard drawn, ASTM B88
Fittings: Wrought Copper, ANSI B16.22
Joints:

Soldered: through 2”
Brazed: for 2-1/2” through 6”
Grooved: for cold water piping 2-1/2” through 6”, may be used excluding inaccessible locations, (not allowed on hot or hot return).
Press-to-Connect: for cold water, hot water and hot water return piping through 4", may be used excluding inaccessible locations.

HYDRONIC PIPING SYSTEMS APPLICATION

Chilled Water - Above Ground

For piping through 4”:

Pipe: Type L Copper, hard drawn, ASTM B88
Fittings: Wrought Copper, ANSI B16.22
Joints: Soldered through 2”; Brazed for 2-1/2” through 4”
Contractor’s Option: For piping 2-1/2” through 4”, excluding inaccessible locations, grooved joints for copper piping may be used.
Contractor’s Option: For piping through 4”, copper press to connect fittings may be used

For piping 5” and larger:

Pipe: Black Steel, Schedule 40, ASTM A53, ERW or seamless, grade B, standard weight for 12” and above
Fittings: Standard weight, butt welded, black steel, ASTM A234
Joints: Welded. Flanged ASTM A181, 150#, forged steel at valves, and equipment.
Contractor’s Option: For piping 5” and larger, excluding inaccessible locations, grooved joints for steel piping may be used.

WELDING

All welding shall be performed by registered welders qualified to perform welding operations in accordance with the National Certified Pipe Welding Bureau’s procedures and standards, ASME Code Standards and the HPACCNA Standard Manual of Welding.

Submit a certified copy of “Record of Pipefitter Welder Performance Qualification Test” of any employees who will be doing welding on this project.

No welding to building work shall be allowed without approval of Engineer.

Except where prohibited by the Reference Standards, code, or ordinance, Black steel piping larger than 6 inch diameter may be welded with chill rings.

Mitered turns will not be allowed. Turns shall be made with factory-made ASME B16.9 long radius wrought steel buttwelding fittings.


Except where prohibited by the Reference Standards, code, or ordinance, branch take-offs with manufactured formed nipples will be permitted provided nipple size is at least two pipe sizes smaller than the main size. Formed nipples shall be Bonney Forge “Weldolets”, “Threadolets”, “Sockolets”. In all other cases, use factory-made ASME B16.9 wrought steel buttwelding tee fittings.

Shop welded pipe assemblies shall have all welds plainly stamped by the welding operator for inspection by the Engineer before installation.

GROOVED PIPING

Where grooved joints are indicated as permitted, such joints are only permitted in accessible locations. The following locations are considered inaccessible: shafts, above dry wall ceilings.

Install couplings from the same manufacturer as the grooved fittings. The same grooved component manufacturer shall be utilized for products installed for the entire scope of the work, for each system.

Groove pipe per manufacturer’s requirements. Grooving tools shall be provided by the same manufacturer as the couplings and fittings. Use special roll sets for copper and stainless steel pipe when required by the manufacturer.

Lubricate gaskets with manufacturer’s recommended gasket lubricant. Use NSF-61 approved lubricant for domestic water piping.

Allow room for pipe expansion for couplings that allow pipe ends to separate before the joint acts in a fully restrained manner, for example, certain couplings used on stainless steel pipe.

Tighten coupling as recommended by the manufacturer. Use a torque wrench and tighten bolts to required torque level when required by the manufacturer

PROTECTION AGAINST FREEZING

At any time that any of the piping is full of water for testing purposes or otherwise prior to actual heated operation, the system shall be protected against freezing by the introduction of pre-mixed propylene glycol type anti-freeze which will be flushed out before acceptance. Provision for introducing anti-freeze shall be made by means of valved connections to the system in an acceptable manner.

INSTALLATION OF PIPE HANGERS AND SUPPORTS

Arrange pipe hangers and supports to permit proper pitch of piping, free to move with pipe expansion, installed at proper intervals to prevent sagging and attached to building construction through approved means. Hangers shall be located near or at changes in piping direction and concentrated loads. Valves, strainers, in line pumps and other heavy equipment shall be supported independent of the pipes. After systems have been installed and filled, adjust hangers and supports to evenly distribute weight, and maintain proper pitch.

Vertical Piping: When support locations are not indicated on the drawings, support piping at every floor level.

Horizontal Piping Hanger Spacing: Space hangers in compliance with applicable codes, or per MSS SP- 89, which ever results in shortest spacing.

For cold piping, install hangers and supports to maintain an effective continuous thermal and vapor barrier between cold piping and hangers and supports.

Plastic Piping: Hang and support in compliance with manufacturer’s recommendations. At hangers and supports, including channel supports, install to prevent plastic pipe contact with metal (exception: angle iron may be used for continuous support, provided all sharp edges are removed). Anchor piping only


where required for expansion loops or to protect against pressure surges, etc. Compression style clamps/supports shall not be used. Use plastic pipe sleeves or equivalent as guides at all other locations, to allow longitudinal thermal expansion and to prevent lateral pipe movement. Compression style riser clamps shall not be used, use other support methods such a supporting at fitting shoulders. Support valves and other significant weight components independent of pipe. Space hangers no farther than manufacturer’s recommendations for the application temperature but in no case farther than recommended for 100 deg. F application temperature. Continuously support all piping 1.5-inch nominal diameter or less (exception: PVC pipe connected to sump pumps). Provide thrust restraints where piping is subject to cyclic pressure surges, e.g. on/off pump applications.

INSTALLATION OF PIPE SLEEVES

Install pipe sleeves where piping passes through building construction including all walls, floors and ceilings.

For new wall construction, promptly and accurately locate and securely set sleeves in forms before concrete is poured. For masonry construction, set the sleeves over the piping for Masonry Contractor to build around.

INSTALLATION OF STRAINERS

Provide Y-strainers in steam, condensate, or water piping preceding control valves, traps, pumps, pressure regulating valves and elsewhere as shown on drawings.

Install strainer elements prior to flushing piping. Remove, clean and reinstall after flushing.

FLUSHING AND CLEANING OF PIPING

Flush the following piping systems:

Chilled Water Supply and Return

Clean the following piping systems:

Chilled Water Supply and Return

Develop plan for flushing and cleaning piping. Submit plan for approval prior to completion of piping. Provide all temporary and permanent piping, equipment, materials necessary to complete flushing and cleaning.

Prior to flushing, swab out underground piping to remove all particulate.

Prior to flushing, temporarily remove, isolate or bypass dirt sensitive equipment and devices, including the following:

Automatic flow control valves
Heating and cooling coils
Boilers
Chillers
Heat exchangers
Flow measuring devices Reinstall after flushing is complete.
Prior to flushing, install fine mesh construction strainers at inlet to all equipment. Install fine mesh construction element in permanent strainers. During flushing and cleaning, remove and clean strainers periodically. At completion of final flush, clean permanent strainers, remove construction strainers.


Flushing for new piping: Flush all piping with cold water (or fire protection system where approved by owner) for a minimum of one hour, until water runs clear. Water supply shall be equivalent to piping to be flushed. Use (2) 2-1/2” fire hose connections for piping 3” and larger. Drain all low points.

Chemical Cleaning for new and existing hydronic piping: Where flushing could not be completed at 6 feet per second, or where chemical cleaning is required for new and existing piping, circulate flush water and clean strainers prior to installing cleaning chemicals. Provide cleaning chemicals, under the direction of the owner’s chemical supplier. Following flushing, install cleaning chemicals and circulate through the entire system for a minimum of one hour, or as directed by chemical supplier. Take water sample for owner’s use. Drain system, including all low points. Flush, drain and fill system, circulate for one hour, sample for owner’s use. Drain, flush, fill, circulate and sample until system is free of cleaning chemicals, as indicated by owner’s analysis of samples.

Estimated system volume for Chilled Water System:4600 Gallons

PIPING SYSTEM PRESSURE TESTING

General:

Test new systems only, from point of connection to the existing systems. Perform initial tests and correct deficiencies prior to requesting acceptance test.
Perform acceptance pressure tests in the presence of the authorities having jurisdiction. Acceptance tests must be satisfactorily completed before piping surfaces are concealed.
Pneumatic tests shall be conducted using dry, oil free compressed air, carbon dioxide or nitrogen. Evacuate personnel not directly involved in testing prior to performing pneumatic testing. Perform testing in two stages, initial and acceptance. Conduct initial testing at 5 PSI or less. Swab joints with a commercial leak detector. Repair deficiencies prior to testing at higher pressures. Under no circumstances shall plastic piping of any type be pneumatically tested, including pre-acceptance tests.
Components shall be removed or isolated during testing if damage may occur due to test pressure and/or test media.
Existing steam and hot water piping connected to piping to be tested shall be shutoff, drained and cooled before testing.

Acceptance Pressure Testing:

Perform acceptance testing at 1.5 times the maximum system design pressure but not less than 100 psig or to the satisfaction of the authority having jurisdiction.
Remake leaking gasket joints with new flange bolting. Where welded joints fail, submit proposed method of repair for approval by the Owner’s representative and authorities having jurisdiction.
For each system tested, provide a certificate testifying that the system was satisfactorily tested and passed, using owner furnished forms.

FLUSHING, DISINFECTING, AND TESTING DOMESTIC WATER PIPING

Flush, disinfect and test domestic water piping as follows:

Prior to disinfection, flush all domestic water piping as described under Flushing and Cleaning of Piping.
Purge and disinfect domestic water piping per plumbing code and local municipality requirements. Do not use excessive amounts of disinfectant, as it may damage piping seals.
Submit water samples in sterile bottles to the local municipality. Repeat the procedure if the biological examination made by the local municipality shows evidence of contamination.


Prepare reports for all purging and disinfecting activities. Furnish owner final copy of test results for acceptance.


END OF SECTION 20 1100


SECTION 23 0593 - TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING FOR HVAC PART 1 - GENERAL
RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 1 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

This Section includes testing, adjusting, and balancing HVAC systems to produce design objectives, including the following:

Balancing airflow and water flow within distribution systems to indicated quantities according to specified tolerances.
Adjusting total HVAC systems to provide indicated quantities.
Setting quantitative performance of HVAC equipment.
Verifying that automatic control devices are functioning properly.
Reporting results of the activities and procedures specified in this Section.

Related Sections include the following:

Testing and adjusting requirements unique to particular systems and equipment are included in the Sections that specify those systems and equipment.
Field quality-control testing to verify that workmanship quality for system and equipment installation is specified in system and equipment Sections.

DEFINITIONS

Adjust: To regulate fluid flow rate and air patterns at the terminal equipment, such as to reduce fan speed or adjust a damper.

Balance: To proportion flows within the distribution system, including submains, branches, and terminals, according to design quantities.

Draft: A current of air, when referring to localized effect caused by one or more factors of high air velocity, low ambient temperature, or direction of airflow, whereby more heat is withdrawn from a person's skin than is normally dissipated.

Procedure: An approach to and execution of a sequence of work operations to yield repeatable results.

Report Forms: Test data sheets for recording test data in logical order.

Static Head: The pressure due to the weight of the fluid above the point of measurement. In a closed system, static head is equal on both sides of the pump.

Suction Head: The height of fluid surface above the centerline of the pump on the suction side.

System Effect: A phenomenon that can create undesired or unpredicted conditions that cause reduced capacities in all or part of a system.

System Effect Factors: Allowances used to calculate a reduction of the performance ratings of a fan when installed under conditions different from those presented when the fan was performance tested.


Terminal: A point where the controlled medium, such as fluid or energy, enters or leaves the distribution system.

Test: A procedure to determine quantitative performance of a system or equipment.

Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing Agent: The entity responsible for performing and reporting the testing, adjusting, and balancing procedures.

TDH: Total Dynamic Head

AABC: Associated Air Balance Council.

AMCA: Air Movement and Control Association.

CTI: Cooling Tower Institute.

NEBB: National Environmental Balancing Bureau.

SMACNA: Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors' National Association.

SUBMITTALS

Quality-Assurance Submittals: Within 30 days from the Contractor's Notice to Proceed, submit 2 copies of evidence that the testing, adjusting, and balancing Agent and this Project's testing, adjusting, and balancing team members meet the qualifications specified in the "Quality Assurance" Article below.

Contract Documents Examination Report: Within 45 days from the Contractor's Notice to Proceed, submit 2 copies of the Contract Documents review report as specified in Part 3 of this Section.

Strategies and Procedures Plan: Within 60 days from the Contractor's Notice to Proceed, submit 2 copies of the testing, adjusting, and balancing strategies and step-by-step procedures as specified in Part 3 "Preparation" Article below. Include a complete set of report forms intended for use on this Project.

Certified Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing Reports: Submit 2 copies of reports prepared, as specified in this Section, on approved forms certified by the testing, adjusting, and balancing Agent.

Sample Report Forms: Submit 2 sets of sample testing, adjusting, and balancing report forms.

Warranty: Submit 2 copies of special warranty specified in the "Warranty" Article below.

BALANCING CONTRACTORS

Only the following contractors will be allowed to provide air and water testing and balancing.

Absolut Balance
Air Flow Testing.
Ener-Tech Testing.
Enviro-Aire/Total Balance, Inc.
Hi-Tech Test and Balance
International Test and Balance
Mechanical Testing Services, Inc.

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Agent Qualifications: Testing, adjusting, and balancing agent shall be certified by either AABC or NEBB.


Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing Conference: Meet with the Owner's and the Architect's representatives on approval of the testing, adjusting, and balancing strategies and procedures plan to develop a mutual understanding of the details. Ensure the participation of testing, adjusting, and balancing team members, equipment manufacturers' authorized service representatives, HVAC controls Installer, and other support personnel. Provide 7 days' advance notice of scheduled meeting time and location.

Agenda Items: Include at least the following:

Submittal distribution requirements
Contract Documents examination report
Testing, adjusting, and balancing plan
Work schedule and Project site access requirements
Coordination and cooperation of trades and subcontractors
Coordination of documentation and communication flow

Certification of Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing Reports: Certify the testing, adjusting, and balancing field data reports. This certification includes the following:

Review field data reports to validate accuracy of data and to prepare certified testing, adjusting, and balancing reports.
Certify that the testing, adjusting, and balancing team complied with the approved testing, adjusting, and balancing plan and the procedures specified and referenced in this Specification.

Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing Reports: Use standard forms from AABC's "National Standards for Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing”, NEBB's "Procedural Standards for Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing of Environmental Systems” and SMACNA's "HVAC Systems--Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing."

Instrumentation Type, Quantity, and Accuracy: As described in AABC National Standards or NEBB's "Procedural Standards for Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing of Environmental Systems," Section II, "Required Instrumentation for NEBB Certification."

Instrumentation Calibration: Calibrate instruments at least every 6 months or more frequently if required by the instrument manufacturer.

PROJECT CONDITIONS

Full Owner Occupancy: The Owner will occupy the site and existing building during the entire testing, adjusting, and balancing period. Cooperate with the Owner during testing, adjusting, and balancing operations to minimize conflicts with the Owner's operations.

Partial Owner Occupancy: The Owner may occupy completed areas of the building before Substantial Completion. Cooperate with the Owner during testing, adjusting, and balancing operations to minimize conflicts with the Owner's operations.

COORDINATION

Coordinate the efforts of factory-authorized service representatives for systems and equipment, HVAC controls installers, and other mechanics to operate HVAC systems and equipment to support and assist testing, adjusting, and balancing activities.

Notice: Provide 7 days' advance notice for each test. Include scheduled test dates and times.

Perform testing, adjusting, and balancing after leakage and pressure tests on air and water distribution systems have been satisfactorily completed.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS (NOT APPLICABLE)


PART 3 - EXECUTION

EXAMINATION

Examine Contract Documents to become familiar with project requirements and to discover conditions in systems' designs that may preclude proper testing, adjusting, and balancing of systems and equipment.

Contract Documents are defined in the General and Supplementary Conditions of the Contract.
Verify that balancing devices, such as test ports, gage cocks, thermometer wells, flow-control devices, balancing valves and fittings, and manual volume dampers, are required by the Contract Documents. Verify that quantities and locations of these balancing devices are accessible and appropriate for effective balancing and for efficient system and equipment operation.

Examine approved submittal data of HVAC systems and equipment.

Examine Architect's and Engineer's design data, including HVAC system descriptions, statements of design assumptions for environmental conditions and systems' output, and statements of philosophies and assumptions about HVAC system and equipment controls.

Examine equipment performance data, including fan and pump curves. Relate performance data to project conditions and requirements, including system effects that can create undesired or unpredicted conditions that cause reduced capacities in all or part of a system. Calculate system effect factors to reduce the performance ratings of HVAC equipment when installed under conditions different from those presented when the equipment was performance tested at the factory. To calculate system effects for air systems, use tables and charts found in AMCA 201, "Fans and Systems," Sections 7 through 10; or in SMACNA's "HVAC Systems--Duct Design," Sections 5 and 6. Compare this data with the design data and installed conditions.

Examine system and equipment installations to verify that they are complete and that testing, cleaning, adjusting, and commissioning specified in individual Specification Sections have been performed.

Examine system and equipment test reports.

Examine HVAC system and equipment installations to verify that indicated balancing devices, such as test ports, gage cocks, thermometer wells, flow-control devices, balancing valves and fittings, and manual volume dampers, are properly installed, and their locations are accessible and appropriate for effective balancing and for efficient system and equipment operation.

Examine systems for functional deficiencies that cannot be corrected by adjusting and balancing.

Examine air-handling equipment to ensure clean filters have been installed, bearings are greased, belts are aligned and tight, and equipment with functioning controls is ready for operation.

Examine terminal units, such as variable-air-volume boxes and mixing boxes, to verify that they are accessible and their controls are connected and functioning.

Examine plenum ceilings, utilized for supply air, to verify that they are airtight. Verify that pipe penetrations and other holes are sealed.

Examine strainers for clean screens and proper perforations.

Examine 3-way valves for proper installation for their intended function of diverting or mixing fluid flows.

Examine heat-transfer coils for correct piping connections and for clean and straight fins.

Examine open-piping-system pumps to ensure absence of entrained air in the suction piping.


Examine equipment for installation and for properly operating safety interlocks and controls.

Examine automatic temperature system components to verify the following:

Dampers, valves, and other controlled devices operate by the intended controller.
Dampers and valves are in the position indicated by the controller.
Integrity of valves and dampers for free and full operation and for tightness of fully closed and fully open positions. This includes dampers in multizone units, mixing boxes, and variable-air-volume terminals.
Automatic modulating and shutoff valves, including 2-way valves and 3-way mixing and diverting valves, are properly connected.
Thermostats and humidistats are located to avoid adverse effects of sunlight, drafts, and cold walls.
Sensors are located to sense only the intended conditions.
Sequence of operation for control modes is according to the Contract Documents.
Controller set points are set at design values. Observe and record system reactions to changes in conditions. Record default set points if different from design values.
Interlocked systems are operating.
Changeover from heating to cooling mode occurs according to design values.

Report deficiencies discovered before and during performance of testing, adjusting, and balancing procedures.

PREPARATION

Prepare a testing, adjusting, and balancing plan that includes strategies and step-by-step procedures.

Complete system readiness checks and prepare system readiness reports. Verify the following:

Permanent electrical power wiring is complete.
Hydronic systems are filled, clean, and free of air.
Automatic temperature-control systems are operational.
Equipment and duct access doors are securely closed.
Balance, smoke, and fire dampers are open.
Isolating and balancing valves are open and control valves are operational.
Ceilings are installed in critical areas where air-pattern adjustments are required and access to balancing devices is provided.
Windows and doors can be closed so design conditions for system operations can be met.

GENERAL TESTING AND BALANCING PROCEDURES

Perform testing and balancing procedures on each system according to the procedures contained in AABC national standards and this Section.

Perform testing and balancing procedures on each system according to the procedures contained in NEBB's "Procedural Standards for Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing of Environmental Systems", SMACNA’s “HVAC Systems - Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing”, and this Section.

Cut insulation, ducts, pipes, and equipment cabinets for installation of test probes to the minimum extent necessary to allow adequate performance of procedures. After testing and balancing, close probe holes and patch insulation with new materials identical to those removed. Restore vapor barrier and finish according to the insulation Specifications for this Project.

Mark equipment settings with paint or other suitable, permanent identification material, including damper- control positions, valve indicators, fan-speed-control levers, and similar controls and devices, to show final settings.


FUNDAMENTAL AIR SYSTEMS' BALANCING PROCEDURES

Prepare test reports for both fans and outlets. Obtain manufacturer's outlet factors and recommended testing procedures. Crosscheck the summation of required outlet volumes with required fan volumes.

Prepare schematic diagrams of systems' "as-built" duct layouts.

For variable-air-volume systems, develop a plan to simulate diversity.

Determine the best locations in main and branch ducts for accurate duct airflow measurements.

Check the airflow patterns from the outside-air louvers and dampers and the return- and exhaust-air dampers, through the supply-fan discharge and mixing dampers.

Locate start-stop and disconnect switches, electrical interlocks, and motor starters.

Verify that motor starters are equipped with properly sized thermal protection.

Check dampers for proper position to achieve desired airflow path.

Check for airflow blockages.

Check condensate drains for proper connections and functioning.

Check for proper sealing of air-handling unit components.

Check for correct fan rotation.

CONSTANT-VOLUME AIR SYSTEMS' BALANCING PROCEDURES

The procedures in this Article apply to constant-volume supply-, return-, and exhaust-air systems. Additional procedures are required for variable-air-volume, multizone, dual-duct, induction-unit supply-air systems and process exhaust-air systems. These additional procedures are specified in other articles in this Section.

Adjust fans to deliver total design airflows within the maximum allowable rpm listed by the fan manufacturer.

Measure fan static pressures to determine actual static pressure as follows:

Measure outlet static pressure as far downstream from the fan as practicable and upstream from restrictions in ducts such as elbows and transitions.
Measure static pressure directly at the fan outlet or through the flexible connection.
Measure inlet static pressure of single-inlet fans in the inlet duct as near the fan as possible, upstream from flexible connection and downstream from duct restrictions.
Measure inlet static pressure of double-inlet fans through the wall of the plenum that houses the fan.

Measure static pressure across each air-handling unit component.

Simulate dirty filter operation and record the point at which maintenance personnel must change filters.

Measure static pressures entering and leaving other devices such as sound traps, heat recovery equipment, and air washers under final balanced conditions.


Compare design data with installed conditions to determine variations in design static pressures versus actual static pressures. Compare actual system effect factors with calculated system effect factors to identify where variations occur. Recommend corrective action to align design and actual conditions.
Adjust fan speed higher or lower than design with the approval of the Architect. Make required adjustments to pulley sizes, motor sizes, and electrical connections to accommodate fan-speed changes.
Do not make fan-speed adjustments that result in motor overload. Consult equipment manufacturers about fan-speed safety factors. Modulate dampers and measure fan-motor amperage to ensure no overload will occur. Measure amperage in full cooling, full heating, and economizer modes to determine the maximum required brake horsepower.

Adjust volume dampers for main duct, submain ducts, and major branch ducts to design airflows within specified tolerances.

Measure static pressure at a point downstream from the balancing damper and adjust volume dampers until the proper static pressure is achieved.

Where sufficient space in submains and branch ducts is unavailable for Pitot-tube traverse measurements, measure airflow at terminal outlets and inlets and calculate the total airflow for that zone.

Remeasure each submain and branch duct after all have been adjusted. Continue to adjust submains and branch ducts to design airflows within specified tolerances.

Measure terminal outlets and inlets without making adjustments.

Measure terminal outlets using a direct-reading hood or the outlet manufacturer's written instructions and calculating factors.

Adjust terminal outlets and inlets for each space to design airflows within specified tolerances of design values. Make adjustments using volume dampers rather than extractors and the dampers at the air terminals.

Adjust each outlet in the same room or space to within specified tolerances of design quantities without generating noise levels above the limitations prescribed by the Contract Documents.
Adjust patterns of adjustable outlets for proper distribution without drafts.

VARIABLE-AIR-VOLUME SYSTEMS' ADDITIONAL PROCEDURES

Compensating for Diversity: When the total airflow of all terminal units is more than the fan design airflow volume, place a selected number of terminal units at a maximum set-point airflow condition until the total airflow of the terminal units equals the design airflow of the fan. Select the reduced airflow terminal units so they are distributed evenly among the branch ducts.

Pressure-Independent, Variable-Air-Volume Systems: After the fan systems have been adjusted, adjust the variable-air-volume systems as follows:

Set outside-air dampers at minimum, and return- and exhaust-air dampers at a position that simulates full-cooling load.
Select the terminal unit that is most critical to the supply-fan airflow and static pressure. Measure static pressure. Adjust system static pressure so the entering static pressure for the critical terminal unit is not less than the sum of the terminal unit manufacturer's recommended minimum inlet static pressure plus the static pressure needed to overcome terminal-unit discharge duct losses.
Measure total system airflow. Adjust to within 5 percent of design airflow.


Set terminal units at maximum airflow and adjust controller or regulator to deliver the designed maximum airflow. Use the terminal unit manufacturer's written instructions to make this adjustment. When total airflow is correct, balance the air outlets downstream from terminal units as described for constant-volume air systems.
Set terminal units at minimum airflow and adjust controller or regulator to deliver the designed minimum airflow. Check air outlets for a proportional reduction in airflow as described for constant- volume air systems.

If air outlets are out of balance at minimum airflow, report the condition but leave the outlets balanced for maximum airflow.

Remeasure the return airflow to the fan while operating at maximum return airflow and minimum outside airflow. Adjust the fan and balance the return-air ducts and inlets as described for constant-volume air systems.
Measure static pressure at the most critical terminal unit and adjust the static-pressure controller at the main supply-air sensing station to ensure adequate static pressure is maintained at the most critical unit.
Record the final fan performance data.

PROCEDURES FOR MULTIZONE SYSTEMS

Position the unit's automatic zone dampers for maximum flow through the cooling coil.

The procedures for multizone systems will utilize the zone balancing dampers to achieve the indicated airflow within the zone.

After balancing, place the unit's automatic zone dampers for maximum heating flow. Retest zone airflows and record any variances.

Adjust fans to deliver total indicated airflows within the maximum allowable fan speed listed by fan manufacturer.

Measure total airflow.

Set outside-air, return-air and relief-air dampers for proper position that simulates minimum outdoor air conditions.
Where duct conditions allow, measure airflow by Pitot-tube traverse. If necessary, perform multiple Pitot-tube traverses to obtain total airflow.
Where duct conditions are not suitable for Pitot-tube traverse measurements, a coil traverse may be acceptable.
If a reliable Pitot-tube traverse or coil traverse is not possible, measure airflow at terminals and calculate the total airflow.

Measure fan static pressures as follows:

Measure static pressure directly at the fan outlet or through the flexible connection.
Measure static pressure directly at the fan inlet or through the flexible connection.
Measure static pressure across each component that makes up the air-handling system.
Report artificial loading of filters at the time static pressures are measured.

Review Record Documents to determine variations in design static pressures versus actual static pressures. Calculate actual system-effect factors. Recommend adjustments to accommodate actual conditions.
Obtain approval [Architect] [Owner] [Construction Manager] [Commissioning Authority] for adjustment of fan speed higher or lower than indicated speed. Comply with requirements in HVAC Sections for air-handling units for adjustment of fans, belts, and pulley sizes to achieve indicated air-handling-unit performance.


Do not make fan-speed adjustments that result in motor overload. Consult equipment manufacturers about fan-speed safety factors. Modulate dampers and measure fan-motor amperage to ensure that no overload occurs. Measure amperage in full-cooling, full-heating, economizer, and any other operating mode to determine the maximum required brake horsepower.

Adjust volume dampers for main duct, submain ducts, and major branch ducts to indicated airflows.

Measure airflow of submain and branch ducts.
Adjust submain and branch duct volume dampers for specified airflow.
Re-measure each submain and branch duct after all have been adjusted.

Adjust air inlets and outlets for each space to indicated airflows.

Set airflow patterns of adjustable outlets for proper distribution without drafts.
Measure inlets and outlets airflow.
Adjust each inlet and outlet for specified airflow.
Re-measure each inlet and outlet after they have been adjusted.

Verify final system conditions.

Re-measure and confirm that minimum outdoor, return, and relief airflows are within design. Readjust to match design if necessary.
Re-measure and confirm that total airflow is within design.
Re-measure all final fan operating data, rpms, volts, amps, and static profile.
Mark all final settings.
Test system in economizer mode. Verify proper operation and adjust if necessary.
Measure and record all operating data.
Record final fan-performance data.

INDUCTION-UNIT SYSTEMS' ADDITIONAL PROCEDURES

Balance primary-air risers by measuring static pressure at the nozzles of the top and bottom units of each riser to determine which risers must be throttled. Adjust risers to indicated airflow within specified tolerances.

Adjust each induction unit.

Adjust fans to deliver total indicated airflows within the maximum allowable fan speed listed by fan manufacturer.

Measure total airflow.

Set outside-air, return-air, and relief-air dampers for proper position that simulates minimum outdoor-air conditions.
Where duct conditions allow, measure airflow by Pitot-tube traverse. If necessary, perform multiple Pitot-tube traverses to obtain total airflow.
Where duct conditions are not suitable for Pitot-tube traverse measurements, a coil traverse may be acceptable.
If a reliable Pitot-tube traverse or coil traverse is not possible, measure airflow at terminals and calculate the total airflow.

Measure fan static pressures as follows:

Measure static pressure directly at the fan outlet or through the flexible connection.
Measure static pressure directly at the fan inlet or through the flexible connection.
Measure static pressure across each component that makes up the air-handling system.
Report artificial loading of filters at the time static pressures are measured.


Review Record Documents to determine variations in design static pressures versus actual static pressures. Calculate actual system-effect factors. Recommend adjustments to accommodate actual conditions.
Obtain approval from [Architect] [Owner] [Construction Manager] [commissioning authority] for adjustment of fan speed higher or lower than indicated speed. Comply with requirements in HVAC Sections for air-handling units for adjustment of fans, belts, and pulley sizes to achieve indicated air-handling-unit performance.
Do not make fan-speed adjustments that result in motor overload. Consult equipment manufacturers about fan-speed safety factors. Modulate dampers and measure fan-motor amperage to ensure that no overload occurs. Measure amperage in full-cooling, full-heating, economizer, and any other operating mode to determine the maximum required brake horsepower.

Adjust volume dampers for main duct, submain ducts, and major branch ducts to indicated airflows.

Measure airflow of submain and branch ducts.
Adjust submain and branch duct volume dampers for specified airflow.
Re-measure each submain and branch duct after all have been adjusted.

Balance airflow to each induction unit by measuring the nozzle pressure and comparing it to the manufacturer's published data for nozzle pressure versus cfm. Adjust the unit's inlet damper to achieve the required nozzle pressure for design cfm.

Verify final system conditions.

Re-measure and confirm that minimum outdoor, return, and relief airflows are within design. Readjust to match design if necessary.
Re-measure and confirm that total airflow is within design.
Re-measure all final fan operating data, rpms, volts, amps, and static profile.
Mark all final settings.
Test system in economizer mode. Verify proper operation and adjust if necessary.
Measure and record all operating data.
Record final fan-performance data.

FUNDAMENTAL PROCEDURES FOR HYDRONIC SYSTEMS

Prepare test reports with pertinent design data and number in sequence starting at pump to end of system. Check the sum of branch-circuit flows against approved pump flow rate. Correct variations that exceed plus or minus 5 percent.

Prepare schematic diagrams of systems' "as-built" piping layouts.

Prepare hydronic systems for testing and balancing according to the following, in addition to the general preparation procedures specified above:

Open all manual valves for maximum flow.
Check expansion tank liquid level.
Check makeup-water-station pressure gage for adequate pressure for highest vent.
Check flow-control valves for specified sequence of operation and set at design flow.
Set differential-pressure control valves at the specified differential pressure. Do not set at fully closed position when pump is positive-displacement type, unless several terminal valves are kept open.
Set system controls so automatic valves are wide open to heat exchangers.
Check pump-motor load. If motor is overloaded, throttle main flow-balancing device so motor nameplate rating is not exceeded.
Check air vents for a forceful liquid flow exiting from vents when manually operated
Check for correct pump rotation.


PROCEDURES FOR CONSTANT-FLOW HYDRONIC SYSTEMS

Adjust pumps to deliver total design gpm.

Measure total water flow.

Position valves for full flow through coils.
Measure flow by main flow meter, if installed.
If main flow meter is not installed, determine flow by pump TDH or exchanger pressure drop.

Measure pump TDH as follows:

Measure discharge pressure directly at the pump outlet flange or in discharge pipe prior to any valves.
Measure inlet pressure directly at the pump inlet flange or in suction pipe prior to any valves or strainers.
Convert pressure to head and correct for differences in gage heights.
Verify pump impeller size by measuring the TDH with the discharge valve closed. Note the point on manufacturer's pump curve at zero flow, and verify that the pump has the intended impeller size.
With valves open, read pump TDH. Adjust pump discharge valve until design water flow is achieved.

Monitor motor performance during procedures and do not operate motor in an overloaded condition.

Adjust flow-measuring devices installed in mains and branches to design water flows.

Measure flow in main and branch pipes.
Adjust main and branch balance valves for design flow.
Re-measure each main and branch after all have been adjusted.

Adjust flow-measuring devices installed at terminals for each space to design water flows.

Measure flow at terminals.
Adjust each terminal to design flow.
Re-measure each terminal after it is adjusted.
Position control valves to bypass the coil, and adjust the bypass valve to maintain design flow.
Perform temperature tests after flows have been balanced.

For systems with pressure-independent valves at terminals:

Measure differential pressure and verify that it is within manufacturer's specified range.
Perform temperature tests after flows have been verified.

For systems without pressure-independent valves or flow-measuring devices at terminals:

Measure and balance coils by either coil pressure drop or temperature method.
If balanced by coil pressure drop, perform temperature tests after flows have been verified.

Verify final system conditions as follows:

Re-measure and confirm that total water flow is within design.
Re-measure final pumps' operating data, TDH, volts, amps, and static profile.
Mark final settings.


Verify that memory stops have been set.

VARIABLE-FLOW HYDRONIC SYSTEMS' ADDITIONAL PROCEDURES

Balance systems with automatic two- and three-way control valves by setting systems at maximum flow through heat-exchange terminals, and proceed as specified above for hydronic systems.

Adjust the variable-flow hydronic system as follows:

Verify that the differential-pressure sensor is located as indicated.
Determine whether there is diversity in the system.

For systems with no diversity:

Adjust pumps to deliver total design gpm.

Measure total water flow.

Position valves for full flow through coils.
Measure flow by main flow meter, if installed.
If main flow meter is not installed, determine flow by pump TDH or exchanger pressure drop.

Measure pump TDH as follows:

Measure discharge pressure directly at the pump outlet flange or in discharge pipe prior to any valves.
Measure inlet pressure directly at the pump inlet flange or in suction pipe prior to any valves or strainers.
Convert pressure to head and correct for differences in gage heights.
Verify pump impeller size by measuring the TDH with the discharge valve closed. Note the point on manufacturer's pump curve at zero flow and verify that the pump has the intended impeller size.
With valves open, read pump TDH. Adjust pump discharge valve until design water flow is achieved.

Monitor motor performance during procedures and do not operate motor in an overloaded condition.

Adjust flow-measuring devices installed in mains and branches to design water flows.

Measure flow in main and branch pipes.
Adjust main and branch balance valves for design flow.
Re-measure each main and branch after all have been adjusted.

Adjust flow-measuring devices installed at terminals for each space to design water flows.

Measure flow at terminals.
Adjust each terminal to design flow.
Re-measure each terminal after it is adjusted.
Position control valves to bypass the coil and adjust the bypass valve to maintain design flow.
Perform temperature tests after flows have been balanced.

Prior to verifying final system conditions, determine the system differential-pressure set point.


If the pump discharge valve was used to set total system flow with variable-frequency controller at 60 Hz, at completion open discharge valve 100 percent and allow variable-frequency controller to control system differential-pressure set point. Record pump data under both conditions.
Mark final settings and verify that all memory stops have been set.
Verify final system conditions as follows:

Re-measure and confirm that total water flow is within design.
Re-measure final pumps' operating data, TDH, volts, amps, and static profile.
Mark final settings.

Verify that memory stops have been set.

For systems with diversity:

Determine diversity factor.
Simulate system diversity by closing required number of control valves, as approved by the design engineer.
Adjust pumps to deliver total design gpm.

Measure total water flow.

Position valves for full flow through coils.
Measure flow by main flow meter, if installed.
If main flow meter is not installed, determine flow by pump TDH or exchanger pressure drop.

Measure pump TDH as follows:

Measure discharge pressure directly at the pump outlet flange or in discharge pipe prior to any valves.
Measure inlet pressure directly at the pump inlet flange or in suction pipe prior to any valves or strainers.
Convert pressure to head and correct for differences in gage heights.
Verify pump impeller size by measuring the TDH with the discharge valve closed. Note the point on manufacturer's pump curve at zero flow and verify that the pump has the intended impeller size.
With valves open, read pump TDH. Adjust pump discharge valve until design water flow is achieved.

Monitor motor performance during procedures and do not operate motor in an overloaded condition.

Adjust flow-measuring devices installed in mains and branches to design water flows.

Measure flow in main and branch pipes.
Adjust main and branch balance valves for design flow.
Re-measure each main and branch after all have been adjusted.

Adjust flow-measuring devices installed at terminals for each space to design water flows.

Measure flow at terminals.
Adjust each terminal to design flow.
Re-measure each terminal after it is adjusted.
Position control valves to bypass the coil, and adjust the bypass valve to maintain design flow.
Perform temperature tests after flows have been balanced.


For systems with pressure-independent valves at terminals:

Measure differential pressure, and verify that it is within manufacturer's specified range.
Perform temperature tests after flows have been verified.

For systems without pressure-independent valves or flow-measuring devices at terminals:

Measure and balance coils by either coil pressure drop or temperature method.
If balanced by coil pressure drop, perform temperature tests after flows have been verified.

Open control valves that were shut. Close a sufficient number of control valves that were previously open to maintain diversity, and balance terminals that were just opened.
Prior to verifying final system conditions, determine system differential-pressure set point.
If the pump discharge valve was used to set total system flow with variable-frequency controller at 60 Hz, at completion open discharge valve 100 percent and allow variable-frequency controller to control system differential-pressure set point. Record pump data under both conditions.
Mark final settings and verify that memory stops have been set.
Verify final system conditions as follows:

Re-measure and confirm that total water flow is within design.
Re-measure final pumps' operating data, TDH, volts, amps, and static profile.
Mark final settings.

Verify that memory stops have been set.

PRIMARY-SECONDARY-FLOW HYDRONIC SYSTEMS' ADDITIONAL PROCEDURES

Balance the primary circuit flow first.

Balance the secondary circuits after the primary circuits are complete.

Adjust pumps to deliver total design gpm.

Measure total water flow.

Position valves for full flow through coils.
Measure flow by main flow meter, if installed.
If main flow meter is not installed, determine flow by pump TDH or exchanger pressure drop.

Measure pump TDH as follows:

Measure discharge pressure directly at the pump outlet flange or in discharge pipe prior to any valves.
Measure inlet pressure directly at the pump inlet flange or in suction pipe prior to any valves or strainers.
Convert pressure to head and correct for differences in gage heights.
Verify pump impeller size by measuring the TDH with the discharge valve closed. Note the point on manufacturer's pump curve at zero flow and verify that the pump has the intended impeller size.
With valves open, read pump TDH. Adjust pump discharge valve until design water flow is achieved.

Monitor motor performance during procedures and do not operate motor in an overloaded condition.


Adjust flow-measuring devices installed in mains and branches to design water flows.

Measure flow in main and branch pipes.
Adjust main and branch balance valves for design flow.
Re-measure each main and branch after all have been adjusted.

Adjust flow-measuring devices installed at terminals for each space to design water flows.

Measure flow at terminals.
Adjust each terminal to design flow.
Re-measure each terminal after it is adjusted.
Position control valves to bypass the coil and adjust the bypass valve to maintain design flow.
Perform temperature tests after flows have been balanced.

For systems with pressure-independent valves at terminals:

Measure differential pressure and verify that it is within manufacturer's specified range.
Perform temperature tests after flows have been verified.

For systems without pressure-independent valves or flow-measuring devices at terminals:

Measure and balance coils by either coil pressure drop or temperature method.
If balanced by coil pressure drop, perform temperature tests after flows have been verified.

Verify final system conditions as follows:

Re-measure and confirm that total water flow is within design.
Re-measure final pumps' operating data, TDH, volts, amps, and static profile.
Mark final settings.

Verify that memory stops have been set.

HEAT EXCHANGERS

Measure water flow through all circuits.

Adjust water flow to within specified tolerances.

Measure inlet and outlet water temperatures.

Measure inlet steam pressure. Check the setting and operation of automatic temperature-control valves, self-contained control valves, and pressure-reducing valves.

Record safety valve settings.

Verify operation of steam traps.

MOTORS

Motors, 1/2 HP and Larger: Test at final balanced conditions and record the following data:

Manufacturer, model, and serial numbers
Motor horsepower rating
Motor rpm
Efficiency rating if high-efficiency motor
Nameplate and measured voltage, each phase


Nameplate and measured amperage, each phase
Starter thermal-protection-element rating

Motors Driven by Variable-Frequency Controllers: Test for proper operation at speeds varying from minimum to maximum. Test the manual bypass for the controller to prove proper operation. Record observations, including controller manufacturer, model and serial numbers, and nameplate data.

CHILLERS

Balance water flow through each evaporator and condenser to within specified tolerances of design flow with all pumps operating. With only one chiller operating in a multiple chiller installation, do not exceed the flow for the maximum tube velocity recommended by the chiller manufacturer. Measure and record the following data with each chiller operating at design conditions:

Evaporator water entering and leaving temperatures, pressure drop, and water flow.
Condenser water entering and leaving temperatures, pressure drop, and water flow.
Evaporator and condenser refrigerant temperatures and pressures, using instruments furnished by the chiller manufacturer.
Power factor if factory-installed instrumentation is furnished for measuring kW.
The kW input if factory-installed instrumentation is furnished for measuring kW.
Capacity: Calculate in tons of cooling.
Air-Cooled Chillers: Verify condenser-fan rotation and record fan data, including number of fans and entering- and leaving-air temperatures.

COOLING TOWERS

Shut off makeup water for the duration of the test, and then make sure the makeup and blow-down systems are fully operational after tests and before leaving the equipment. Perform the following tests and record the results:

Measure condenser water flow to each cell of the cooling tower.
Measure entering- and leaving-water temperatures.
Measure wet- and dry-bulb temperatures of entering air.
Measure wet- and dry-bulb temperatures of leaving air.
Measure condenser water flow rate recirculating through the cooling tower.
Measure cooling tower pump discharge pressure.
Adjust water level and feed rate of makeup-water system.

CONDENSING UNITS

Verify proper rotation of fans and measure entering- and leaving-air temperatures. Record compressor data.

BOILERS

Hydronic Boilers:

Measure and record entering- and leaving-water temperatures.
Measure and record water flow.
Record relief valve pressure setting.

Steam Boilers:

Measure and record entering-water temperature.
Measure and record feed water flow.
Measure and record leaving-steam pressure and temperature.
Record relief valve pressure setting.


HEAT-TRANSFER COILS

Measure, adjust, and record the following data for each water coil:

Entering- and leaving-water temperature.
Water flow rate.
Water pressure drop for major (more than 20 gpm) equipment coils, excluding unitary equipment such as reheat coils, unit heaters, and fan-coil units.
Dry-bulb temperature of entering and leaving air.
Wet-bulb temperature of entering and leaving air for cooling coils.
Airflow.

Measure, adjust, and record the following data for each electric heating coil:

Nameplate data.
Airflow.
Entering- and leaving-air temperature at full load.
Voltage and amperage input of each phase at full load.
Calculated kilowatt at full load.
Fuse or circuit-breaker rating for overload protection.

Measure, adjust, and record the following data for each steam coil:

Dry-bulb temperature of entering and leaving air.
Airflow.
Inlet steam pressure.

Measure, adjust, and record the following data for each refrigerant coil:

Dry-bulb temperature of entering and leaving air.
Wet-bulb temperature of entering and leaving air.
Airflow.

TEMPERATURE TESTING

During testing, adjusting, and balancing, report need for adjustment in temperature regulation within the automatic temperature-control system.

Measure indoor wet- and dry-bulb temperatures every other hour for a period of 2 successive 8-hour days, in each separately controlled zone, to prove correctness of final temperature settings. Measure when the building or zone is occupied.

Measure outside-air, wet- and dry-bulb temperatures.

FUME HOODS

Determine total airflow into the room where the fume hood is located and balance systems to ensure adequate air supply to all hoods.

Set fume-hood door opening at position of normal use.
Energize the exhaust fan and adjust airflow to provide the indicated average fume-hood face velocity at hood opening.
Measure exhaust airflow volume by measuring airflow by Pitot-tube duct traverse.
Measure air velocity using Pitot-tube traverse method.
Record each face velocity measurement taken at 4 to 6 inch increments over the entire hood door opening.
Calculate the average face velocity by averaging all velocity measurements.


Calculate the airflow volume of exhaust-hood face velocity by multiplying the calculated average face velocity by the opening area. Compare this quantity with exhaust volume at exhaust fan and report duct leakage.
Measure airflow volume supplied by makeup fan. Verify that the makeup system supplies the proper amount of air to keep the space at the indicated pressure with the exhaust systems in all operating conditions.
Retest for average face velocity. Adjust hood baffles, fan drives, and other parts of the system to provide the indicated average face velocity and the indicated auxiliary air-supply percentages.
Retest and adjust the systems until fume-hood performance complies with Contract Documents.

TEMPERATURE-CONTROL VERIFICATION

Verify that controllers are calibrated and commissioned.

Check transmitter and controller locations and note conditions that would adversely affect control functions.

Record controller settings and note variances between set points and actual measurements.

Verify operation of limiting controllers (i.e., high- and low-temperature controllers).

Verify free travel and proper operation of control devices such as damper and valve operators.

Verify sequence of operation of control devices. Note air pressures and device positions and correlate with airflow and water-flow measurements. Note the speed of response to input changes.

Confirm interaction of electrically operated switch transducers.

Confirm interaction of interlock and lockout systems.

Verify main control supply-air pressure and observe compressor and dryer operations.

Record voltages of power supply and controller output. Determine if the system operates on a grounded or non-grounded power supply.

Note operation of electric actuators using spring return for proper fail-safe operations.

TOLERANCES

Set HVAC system airflow and water flow rates within the following tolerances:

Supply, Return, and Exhaust Fans: 0 to plus 5 percent.
Air Outlets and Inlets: Plus 5 to minus 5 percent.
Heating-Water Flow Rate: Plus 5 to minus 5 percent.
Cooling-Water Flow Rate: Plus 5 to minus 5 percent.
Kitchen and Lab Exhaust: 0 to plus 5 percent.

DUCT LEAKAGE TESTS

Witness the duct pressure testing performed by Installer.

Verify that proper test methods are used and that leakage rates are within specified tolerances.

Report deficiencies observed.


PROCEDURES FOR TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING EXISTING SYSTEMS

Perform a preconstruction inspection of existing equipment that is to remain and be reused.

Measure and record the operating speed, airflow, and static pressure of each fan.
Measure motor voltage and amperage. Compare the values to motor nameplate information.
Check the refrigerant charge.
Check the condition of filters.
Check the condition of coils.
Check the operation of the drain pan and condensate-drain trap.
Check bearings and other lubricated parts for proper lubrication.
Report on the operating condition of the equipment and the results of the measurements taken. Report deficiencies.

Before performing testing and balancing of existing systems, inspect existing equipment that is to remain and be reused to verify that existing equipment has been cleaned and refurbished. Verify the following:

New filters are installed.
Coils are clean and fins combed.
Drain pans are clean.
Fans are clean.
Bearings and other parts are properly lubricated.
Deficiencies noted in the preconstruction report are corrected.

Perform testing and balancing of existing systems to the extent that existing systems are affected by the renovation work.

Compare the indicated airflow of the renovated work to the measured fan airflows, and determine the new fan speed and the face velocity of filters and coils.
Verify that the indicated airflows of the renovated work result in filter and coil face velocities and fan speeds that are within the acceptable limits defined by equipment manufacturer.
If calculations increase or decrease the airflow rates and water flow rates by more than 5 percent, make equipment adjustments to achieve the calculated rates. If increase or decrease is 5 percent or less, equipment adjustments are not required.
Balance each air outlet.

REPORTING

Initial Construction-Phase Report: Based on examination of the Contract Documents as specified in "Examination" Article above, prepare a report on the adequacy of design for systems' balancing devices. Recommend changes and additions to systems' balancing devices to facilitate proper performance measuring and balancing. Recommend changes and additions to HVAC systems and general construction to allow access for performance measuring and balancing devices.

Status Reports: As Work progresses, prepare reports to describe completed procedures, procedures in progress, and scheduled procedures. Include a list of deficiencies and problems found in systems being tested and balanced. Prepare a separate report for each system and each building floor for systems serving multiple floors.

FINAL REPORT

General: Typewritten, or computer printout in letter-quality font, on standard bond paper, in 3-ring binder, tabulated and divided into sections by tested and balanced systems.


Include a certification sheet in front of binder signed and sealed by the certified testing and balancing engineer.

Include a list of the instruments used for procedures, along with proof of calibration.

Final Report Contents: In addition to the certified field report data, include the following:

Pump curves
Fan curves
Manufacturers' test data
Field test reports prepared by system and equipment installers
Other information relative to equipment performance, but do not include approved Shop Drawings and Product Data

General Report Data: In addition to the form titles and entries, include the following data in the final report, as applicable:

Title page
Name and address of testing, adjusting, and balancing Agent
Project name
Project location
Architect's name and address
Engineer's name and address
Contractor's name and address
Report date
Signature of testing, adjusting, and balancing Agent who certifies the report
Summary of contents, including the following:

Design versus final performance
Notable characteristics of systems
Description of system operation sequence if it varies from the Contract Documents

Nomenclature sheets for each item of equipment
Data for terminal units, including manufacturer, type size, and fittings
Notes to explain why certain final data in the body of reports vary from design values
Test conditions for fans and pump performance forms, including the following:

Settings for outside-, return-, and exhaust-air dampers
Conditions of filters
Cooling coil, wet- and dry-bulb conditions
Face and bypass damper settings at coils
Fan drive settings, including settings and percentage of maximum pitch diameter
Inlet vane settings for variable-air-volume systems
Settings for supply-air, static-pressure controller
Other system operating conditions that affect performance

System Diagrams: Include schematic layouts of air and hydronic distribution systems. Present with single-line diagrams and include the following:

Quantities of outside, supply, return, and exhaust airflows
Water and steam flow rates
Duct, outlet, and inlet sizes
Pipe and valve sizes and locations
Terminal units
Balancing stations


Air-Handling Unit Test Reports: For air-handling units with coils, include the following:

Unit Data: Include the following:

Unit identification
Location
Make and type
Model number and unit size
Manufacturer's serial number
Unit arrangement and class
Discharge arrangement
Sheave make, size in inches, and bore
Sheave dimensions, center-to-center and amount of adjustments in inches
Number of belts, make, and size
Number of filters, type, and size

Motor Data: Include the following:

Make and frame type and size
Horsepower and rpm
Volts, phase, and hertz
Full-load amperage and service factor
Sheave make, size in inches, and bore
Sheave dimensions, center-to-center and amount of adjustments in inches

Test Data: Include design and actual values for the following:

Total airflow rate in cfm
Total system static pressure in inches wg
Fan rpm
Discharge static pressure in inches wg
Filter static-pressure differential in inches wg
Preheat coil static-pressure differential in inches wg
Cooling coil static-pressure differential in inches wg
Heating coil static-pressure differential in inches wg
Outside airflow in cfm
Return airflow in cfm
Outside-air damper position
Return-air damper position
Vortex damper position

Apparatus-Coil Test Reports: For apparatus coils, include the following:

Coil Data: Include the following:

System identification
Location
Coil type
Number of rows
Fin spacing in fins per inch
Make and model number
Face area in sq. ft.
Tube size in NPS
Tube and fin materials
Circuiting arrangement


Test Data: Include design and actual values for the following:

Airflow rate in cfm
Average face velocity in fpm
Air pressure drop in inches wg
Outside-air, wet- and dry-bulb temperatures in deg F
Return-air, wet- and dry-bulb temperatures in deg F
Entering-air, wet- and dry-bulb temperatures in deg F
Leaving-air, wet- and dry-bulb temperatures in deg F
Water flow rate in gpm
Water pressure differential in feet of head or psig
Entering-water temperature in deg F
Leaving-water temperature in deg F
Refrigerant expansion valve and refrigerant types
Refrigerant suction pressure in psig
Refrigerant suction temperature in deg F
Inlet steam pressure in psig

Gas- and Oil-Fired Heat Apparatus Test Reports:	In addition to the manufacturer's factory startup equipment reports, include the following:

Unit Data: Include the following:

System identification
Location
Make and type
Model number and unit size
Manufacturer's serial number
Fuel type in input data
Output capacity in Btuh
Ignition type
Burner-control types
Motor horsepower and rpm
Motor volts, phase, and hertz
Motor full-load amperage and service factor
Sheave make, size in inches, and bore
Sheave dimensions, center-to-center and amount of adjustments in inches

Test Data: Include design and actual values for the following:

Total airflow rate in cfm
Entering-air temperature in deg F
Leaving-air temperature in deg F
Air temperature differential in deg F
Entering-air static pressure in inches wg
Leaving-air static pressure in inches wg
Air static-pressure differential in inches wg
Low-fire fuel input in Btuh
High-fire fuel input in Btuh
Manifold pressure in psig
High-temperature-limit setting in deg F
Operating set point in Btuh
Motor voltage at each connection
Motor amperage for each phase
Heating value of fuel in Btuh


Electric-Coil Test Reports: For electric furnaces, duct coils, and electric coils installed in central-station air- handling units, include the following:

Unit Data: Include the following:

System identification
Location
Coil identification
Capacity in Btuh
Number of stages
Connected volts, phase, and hertz
Rated amperage
Airflow rate in cfm
Face area in sq. ft.
Minimum face velocity in fpm

Test Data: Include design and actual values for the following:

Heat output in Btuh
Airflow rate in cfm
Air velocity in fpm
Entering-air temperature in deg F
Leaving-air temperature in deg F
Voltage at each connection
Amperage for each phase

Fan Test Reports: For supply, return, and exhaust fans, include the following:

Fan Data: Include the following:

System identification
Location
Make and type
Model number and size
Manufacturer's serial number
Arrangement and class
Sheave make, size in inches, and bore
Sheave dimensions, center-to-center and amount of adjustments in inches

Motor Data: Include the following:

Make and frame type and size
Horsepower and rpm
Volts, phase, and hertz
Full-load amperage and service factor
Sheave make, size in inches, and bore
Sheave dimensions, center-to-center and amount of adjustments in inches
Number of belts, make, and size

Test Data: Include design and actual values for the following:

Total airflow rate in cfm
Total system static pressure in inches wg
Fan rpm
Discharge static pressure in inches wg
Suction static pressure in inches wg


Round, Flat-Oval, and Rectangular Duct Traverse Reports: Include a diagram with a grid representing the duct cross-section and record the following:

Report Data: Include the following:

System and air-handling unit number
Location and zone
Traverse air temperature in deg F
Duct static pressure in inches wg
Duct size in inches
Duct area in sq. ft.
Design airflow rate in cfm
Design velocity in fpm
Actual airflow rate in cfm
Actual average velocity in fpm
Barometric pressure in psig

Air-Terminal-Device Reports: For terminal units, include the following:

Unit Data: Include the following:

System and air-handling unit identification
Location and zone
Test apparatus used
Area served
Air-terminal-device make
Air-terminal-device number from system diagram
Air-terminal-device type and model number
Air-terminal-device size
Air-terminal-device effective area in sq. ft.

Test Data: Include design and actual values for the following:

Airflow rate in cfm
Air velocity in fpm
Preliminary airflow rate as needed in cfm
Preliminary velocity as needed in fpm
Final airflow rate in cfm
Final velocity in fpm
Space temperature in deg F

System-Coil Reports: For reheat coils and water coils of terminal units, include the following:

Unit Data: Include the following:

System and air-handling unit identification
Location and zone
Room or riser served
Coil make and size
Flowmeter type

Test Data: Include design and actual values for the following:

Airflow rate in cfm
Entering-water temperature in deg F
Leaving-water temperature in deg F
Water pressure drop in feet of head or psig


Entering-air temperature in deg F
Leaving-air temperature in deg F

Packaged Chiller Reports: For each chiller, include the following:

Unit Data: Include the following:

Unit identification
Make and model number
Manufacturer's serial number
Refrigerant type and capacity in gallons
Starter type and size
Starter thermal protection size

Condenser Test Data: Include design and actual values for the following:

Refrigerant pressure in psig
Refrigerant temperature in deg F
Entering-water temperature in deg F
Leaving-water temperature in deg F
Entering-water pressure in feet of head or psig
Water pressure differential in feet of head or psig

Evaporator Test Reports: Include design and actual values for the following:

Refrigerant pressure in psig
Refrigerant temperature in deg F
Entering-water temperature in deg F
Leaving-water temperature in deg F
Entering-water pressure in feet of head or psig
Water pressure differential in feet of head or psig

Compressor Test Data: Include design and actual values for the following:

Make and model number
Manufacturer's serial number
Suction pressure in psig
Suction temperature in deg F
Discharge pressure in psig
Discharge temperature in deg F
Oil pressure in psig
Oil temperature in deg F
Voltage at each connection
Amperage for each phase
The kW input
Crankcase heater kW
Chilled water control set point in deg F
Condenser water control set point in deg F
Refrigerant low-pressure-cutoff set point in psig
Refrigerant high-pressure-cutoff set point in psig

Refrigerant Test Data: Include design and actual values for the following:

Oil level
Refrigerant level
Relief valve setting in psig
Unloader set points in psig
Percentage of cylinders unloaded


Bearing temperatures in deg F
Vane position
Low-temperature-cutoff set point in deg F

Compressor and Condenser Reports: For refrigerant side of unitary systems, stand-alone refrigerant compressors, air-cooled condensing units, or water-cooled condensing units, include the following:

Unit Data: Include the following:

Unit identification
Location
Unit make and model number
Manufacturer's compressor serial numbers
Compressor make
Compressor model and serial numbers
Refrigerant weight in pounds
Low ambient temperature cutoff in deg F

Test Data: Include design and actual values for the following:

Inlet-duct static pressure in inches wg
Outlet-duct static pressure in inches wg
Entering-air, dry-bulb temperature in deg F
Leaving-air, dry-bulb temperature in deg F
Condenser entering-water temperature in deg F
Condenser leaving-water temperature in deg F
Condenser water temperature differential in deg F
Condenser entering-water pressure in feet of head or psig
Condenser leaving-water pressure in feet of head or psig
Condenser water pressure differential in feet of head or psig
Control settings
Unloader set points
Low-pressure-cutout set point in psig
High-pressure-cutout set point in psig
Suction pressure in psig
Suction temperature in deg F
Condenser refrigerant pressure in psig
Condenser refrigerant temperature in deg F
Oil pressure in psig
Oil temperature in deg F
Voltage at each connection
Amperage for each phase
The kW input
Crankcase heater kW
Number of fans
Condenser fan rpm
Condenser fan airflow rate in cfm
Condenser fan motor make, frame size, rpm, and horsepower
Condenser fan motor voltage at each connection
Condenser fan motor amperage for each phase

Cooling Tower or Condenser Test Reports: For cooling towers or condensers, include the following:

Unit Data: Include the following:

Unit identification
Make and type
Model and serial numbers


Nominal cooling capacity in tons
Refrigerant type and weight in pounds
Water-treatment chemical feeder and chemical
Number and type of fans
Fan motor make, frame size, rpm, and horsepower
Fan motor voltage at each connection
Sheave make, size in inches, and bore
Sheave dimensions, center-to-center and amount of adjustments in inches
Number of belts, make, and size

Pump Test Data: Include design and actual values for the following:

Make and model number
Manufacturer's serial number
Motor make and frame size
Motor horsepower and rpm
Voltage at each connection
Amperage for each phase
Water flow rate in gpm

Water Test Data: Include design and actual values for the following:

Entering-water temperature in deg F
Leaving-water temperature in deg F
Water temperature differential in deg F
Entering-water pressure in feet of head or psig
Leaving-water pressure in feet of head or psig
Water pressure differential in feet of head or psig
Water flow rate in gpm
Bleed water flow rate in gpm

Air Data: Include design and actual values for the following:

Duct airflow rate in cfm
Inlet-duct static pressure in inches wg
Outlet-duct static pressure in inches wg
Average entering-air, wet-bulb temperature in deg F
Average leaving-air, wet-bulb temperature in deg F
Ambient wet-bulb temperature in deg F

Heat-Exchanger/Converter Test Reports: For steam and hot-water heat exchangers, include the following:

Unit Data: Include the following:

Unit identification
Location
Service
Make and type
Model and serial numbers
Ratings

Steam Test Data: Include design and actual values for the following:

Inlet pressure in psig
Condensate flow rate in lb/h


Primary Water Test Data: Include design and actual values for the following:

Entering-water temperature in deg F
Leaving-water temperature in deg F
Entering-water pressure in feet of head or psig
Water pressure differential in feet of head or psig
Water flow rate in gpm

Secondary Water Test Data: Include design and actual values for the following:

Entering-water temperature in deg F
Leaving-water temperature in deg F
Entering-water pressure in feet of head or psig
Water pressure differential in feet of head or psig
Water flow rate in gpm

Pump Test Reports: For pumps, include the following data. Calculate impeller size by plotting the shutoff head on pump curves.

Unit Data: Include the following:

Unit identification
Location
Service
Make and size
Model and serial numbers
Water flow rate in gpm
Water pressure differential in feet of head or psig
Required net positive suction head in feet of head or psig
Pump rpm
Impeller diameter in inches
Motor make and frame size
Motor horsepower and rpm
Voltage at each connection
Amperage for each phase
Full-load amperage and service factor
Seal type

Test Data: Include design and actual values for the following:

Static head in feet of head or psig
Pump shutoff pressure in feet of head or psig
Actual impeller size in inches
Full-open flow rate in gpm
Full-open pressure in feet of head or psig
Final discharge pressure in feet of head or psig
Final suction pressure in feet of head or psig
Final total pressure in feet of head or psig
Final water flow rate in gpm
Voltage at each connection
Amperage for each phase

Boiler Test Reports: For boilers, include the following:

Unit Data: Include the following:

Unit identification
Location


Service
Make and type
Model and serial numbers
Fuel type and input in Btuh
Number of passes
Ignition type
Burner-control types
Voltage at each connection
Amperage for each phase

Test Data: Include design and actual values for the following:

Operating pressure in psig
Operating temperature in deg F
Entering-water temperature in deg F
Leaving-water temperature in deg F
Number of safety valves and sizes in NPS
Safety valve settings in psig
High-limit setting in psig
Operating-control setting
High-fire set point
Low-fire set point
Voltage at each connection
Amperage for each phase
Draft fan voltage at each connection
Draft fan amperage for each phase
Manifold pressure in psig

Instrument Calibration Reports: For instrument calibration, include the following:

Report Data: Include the following:

Instrument type and make
Serial number
Application
Dates of use
Dates of calibration

VERIFICATION OF TAB REPORT

The TAB specialist's test and balance engineer shall conduct the inspection in the presence of Architect and/or Owner.

Architect/Owner shall randomly select measurements, documented in the final report, to be rechecked. Rechecking shall be limited to either 10 percent of the total measurements recorded or the extent of measurements that can be accomplished in a normal 8-hour business day.

If rechecks yield measurements that differ from the measurements documented in the final report by more than the tolerances allowed, the measurements shall be noted as "FAILED."

If the number of "FAILED" measurements is greater than 10 percent of the total measurements checked during the final inspection, the testing and balancing shall be considered incomplete and shall be rejected.


If TAB work fails, proceed as follows:

TAB specialists shall recheck all measurements and make adjustments. Revise the final report and balancing device settings to include all changes; resubmit the final report and request a second final inspection.
If the second final inspection also fails, Owner may contract the services of another TAB specialist to complete TAB work according to the Contract Documents and deduct the cost of the services from the original TAB specialist's final payment.
If the second verification also fails, Architect may contact AABC Headquarters regarding the AABC National Performance Guaranty, if applicable.

Prepare test and inspection reports.

ADDITIONAL TESTS

Within 90 days of completing testing, adjusting, and balancing, perform additional testing and balancing to verify that balanced conditions are being maintained throughout and to correct unusual conditions.

Seasonal Periods: If initial testing, adjusting, and balancing procedures were not performed during near- peak summer and winter conditions, perform additional inspections, testing, and adjusting during near- peak summer and winter conditions.


END OF SECTION 23 0593


SECTION 23 0900 – INSTRUMENTATION AND CONTROL FOR HVAC

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and other Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

Related Sections:

Division 20: Common Mechanical Requirements
Division 22: Plumbing
Division 23: Heating, Ventilating and Air-Conditioning (HVAC)
Division 26: Electrical
Division 28: Electronic Safety and Security

SUMMARY

This Section Includes:

Building Automation System (BAS), including controls for mechanical equipment to control temperature, humidity, ventilation, pressure, and other functions as indicated.
BAS Operator Interface System (OIS) including operator interface for monitoring and control of connected systems and equipment.
Refer to Drawings for Sequence of Operations and additional requirements related to this section.

Scope of Work:

The Mechanical Systems Controls Contractor (MSCC) shall provide and install all controls, sensors, wiring, control valves, dampers, electrical, and accessories as indicated and as necessary for a complete mechanical controls solution.
The MSCC shall complete systems integration of all new custom and packaged mechanical controls devices, and additional devices indicated in the project Drawings and Specifications, into the existing Owner centralized Johnson Controls BAS Operator Interface System (OIS) for the remote monitoring and control of the BAS including but not limited to BAS system point monitoring, developed system graphics, point trends, equipment schedules, and system alarm annunciation.
The MSCC shall complete field installation of devices, wiring, and integration into the central OIS as indicated in project Drawings and Specifications for Units provided with packaged controls by the unit manufacturer.
The MSCC shall complete integration of any auxiliary systems (i.e.. Laboratory Controls, Lighting Controls, Power Monitoring, Fire Alarm system, Security Systems, etc.) into the central OIS as indicated in the project Drawings and Specifications. MSCC shall review project Drawings and Specifications as necessary for any requirements and details regarding auxiliary systems integration.

DEFINITIONS

AE: Architect/Engineer.

Algorithm: A logical procedure for solving a recurrent mathematical problem. A prescribed set of well-defined rules or processes for solving a problem in a finite number of steps.

Analog: A continuously varying signal value, such as current, flow, pressure, or temperature.


BACnet Specific Definitions:

BACnet: Building Automation Control Network Protocol, ASHRAE 135. A communications protocol allowing devices to communicate data and services over a network.
BACnet Interoperability Building Blocks (BIBBs): BIBB defines a small portion of BACnet functionality that is needed to perform a particular task. BIBBs are combined to build the BACnet functional requirements for a device.
BACnet/IP: Defines and allows using a reserved UDP socket to transmit BACnet messages over IP networks. A BACnet/IP network is a collection of one or more IP subnetworks that share the same BACnet network number.
BACnet Testing Laboratories (BTL): Organization responsible for testing products for compliance with ASHRAE 135, operated under direction of BACnet International.
B-AWS: BACnet Advanced Operator Workstation
B-OWS: BACnet Operator Workstation
B-OD: BACnet Operator Display
B-BC: BACnet Building Controller
B-AAC: BACnet Advanced Application Controller
B-ASC: BACnet Application Specific Controller
B-LD: BACnet Lighting Device
B-SS: BACnet Smart Sensor
B-SA: BACnet Smart Actuator
B-RTR: BACnet Router
B-GW: BACnet Gateway
B-BBMD: BACnet Broadcast Management Device
B-GEN: BACnet General

BAS: Building Automation System.

Binary: Two-state signal where a high signal level represents "ON" or "OPEN" condition and a low signal level represents "OFF" or "CLOSED" condition. "Digital" is sometimes used interchangeably with "Binary" to indicate a two-state signal.

Controller: Generic term for any standalone, microprocessor-based, digital controller residing on a network, used for local or global control. Three types of controllers are indicated: network controllers, programmable application controllers, and application-specific controllers.

COV: Changes of value.

DDC: Direct Digital Control.

EEPROM: Electronically Erasable Programmable Read-Only Memory.

EPROM: Erasable Programmable Read-Only Memory.

E/P: Voltage to pneumatic.

Gateway: Bidirectional protocol translator that connects control systems that use different communication protocols.

IP: Internet Protocol.

I/P: Current to pneumatic.

IT: Information Technology.

LAN: Local Area Network.


LCC: Laboratory Controls Contractor.

LNS: LonWorks Network Services.

LON Specific Definitions:

FTT-10: Echelon Transmitter-Free Topology Transceiver.
LonMark International: Association comprising suppliers and installers of LonTalk products. Association provides guidelines for implementing LonTalk protocol to ensure interoperability through a standard or consistent implementation.
LonTalk: An open standard protocol developed by Echelon Corporation that uses a "Neuron Chip" for communication. LonTalk is a register trademark of Echelon.
LonWorks: Network technology developed by Echelon.
Node: Device that communicates using CTA-709.1-D protocol and that is connected to a CTA-709.1- D network.
Node Address: The logical address of a node on the network, consisting of a Domain number, Subnet number, and Node number. "Node number" portion of an address is a number assigned to device during installation, is unique within a subnet, and is not a factory-set unique Node ID.
Node ID: A unique 48-bit identifier assigned at factory to each CTA-709.1-D device. Sometimes called a "Neuron ID."
Program ID: An identifier (number) stored in a device (usually, EEPROM) that identifies node manufacturer, functionality of device (application and sequence), transceiver used, and intended device usage.
Standard Configuration Property Type (SCPT): Pronounced "skip-it." A standard format type maintained by LonMark for configuration properties.
Standard Network Variable Type (SNVT): Pronounced "snivet." A standard format type maintained by LonMark used to define data information transmitted and received by individual nodes. "SNVT" is used in two ways. It is an acronym for "Standard Network Variable Type" and is often used to indicate a network variable itself (i.e., it can mean "a network variable of a standard network variable type").
Subnet: Consists of a logical grouping of up to 127 nodes, where logical grouping is defined by node addressing. Each subnet is assigned a number, which is unique within a Domain. See "Node Address."
TP/FT-10: Free Topology Twisted Pair network defined by CTA-709.3 and is most common media type for a CTA-709.1-D control network.
TP/XF-1250: High-speed, 1.25 Mbps, twisted-pair, doubly terminated bus network defined by "LonMark Interoperability Guidelines" and typically used only to connect multiple TP/FT-10 networks.
User-Defined Configuration Property Type (UCPT): Pronounced "u-keep-it." A Configuration Property format type that is defined by device manufacturer.
User-Defined Network Variable Type (UNVT): Network variable format defined by device manufacturer. UNVTs create non-standard communications that other vendors' devices may not correctly interpret and may negatively impact system operation. UNVTs are not allowed.

Low Voltage: As defined in NFPA 70 for circuits and equipment operating at less than 50 V or for remote- control, signaling power-limited circuits.

Mobile Device: A data-enabled phone or tablet computer capable of connecting to a cellular data network and running a native control application or accessing a web interface.

Modbus TCP/IP: An open protocol for exchange of process data.

MSCC: Mechanical Systems Controls Contractor.

MSTP: Master/Slave Token Passing.

Network Controller: Digital controller, which supports a family of programmable application controllers and application-specific controllers, that communicates on peer-to-peer network for transmission of global data.


Network Repeater: Device that receives data packet from one network and rebroadcasts it to another network. No routing information is added to protocol.

OIS: Operator Interface System.

Peer to Peer: Networking architecture that treats all network stations as equal partners.

PICS: BACnet Protocol Implementation Conformance Statement.

RAM: Random access memory.

RF: Radio frequency.

Router: Device connecting two or more networks at network layer.

Server: Computer used to maintain system configuration, historical and programming database.

II.	SI: Systems Integrator.

TCP/IP: Transport control protocol/Internet protocol.

UC: Unitary Controller.

UPS: Uninterruptible power supply.

USB: Universal Serial Bus.

User Datagram Protocol (UDP): This protocol assumes that the IP is used as the underlying protocol.

VAV: Variable air volume.

SYSTEM DESCRIPTION

Demolition Work: The MSCC shall visit the job site prior to, and during, the demolition phase to clearly identify and protect control tubes, wires, and devices necessary to keep the remaining systems active during the project phasing. Post construction demolition relative to control infrastructure shall be coordinated by this contractor with the construction manager and demolition contractor. All obsolete control equipment shall be removed from the site, unless otherwise noted on the drawings. The MSCC shall be responsible to repair visible architectural finishes surrounding demolished materials as necessary to match existing. The MSCC shall be responsible to ensure that any demolition activities involving existing site Controls Systems, field device networks, or Operator Interface Systems do not impact or alter the operation or performance of any existing site Systems or Equipment intended to remain.

New Work: Provide all items, articles, materials, operations, or methods listed, mentioned, or scheduled on drawings and/or herein, including all labor, materials, equipment, and incidentals necessary and required to complete the installation of the controls for equipment as indicated on the drawings and herein described.


Provide a Building Automation System (BAS) incorporating Direct Digital Control (DDC), equipment monitoring, and control consisting of microcomputer based DCC Panels interfacing directly with sensors, actuators and environmental delivery systems (i.e., HVAC units, boilers, etc.); electric controls and mechanical devices for all items indicated on drawings, a primary communication network to allow data exchange from DDC panel to DDC panel; microcomputer based Unitary DDC Controllers (UCs) interfacing with sensors, actuators, and terminal equipment control devices; and a secondary communication network interfacing UCs to DDC panel network devices. The system shall be based on industry standard open protocols.

The Mechanical Systems Controls Contractor (MSCC) shall furnish and install a networked system of HVAC controls. The contractor shall incorporate direct digital control (DDC) for central plant engineering, building ventilation equipment, supplemental heating and cooling equipment and terminal units.
Provide networking to new DDC equipment using communication standards. System shall be capable of BACnet communication according to the most recent version of ASHRAE standard ANSI/ASHRAE 135 for interoperability with smart equipment and for the main IP communication trunk to the BAS server. The system shall not be limited to only standard protocols but shall also be able to integrate to a wide variety of third-party devices and applications via drivers and gateways.
Provide standalone controls where called for on the drawings or sequences.
The installation of the control system shall be performed under the direct supervision of the controls manufacturer with the shop drawings, flow diagrams, bill of materials, component designation, or identification number and sequence of operation all bearing the name of the manufacturer.
Furnish a complete distributed direct digital control system in accordance with this specification section. This includes all system controllers, logic controllers and all input/output devices. Items of work included are as follows:

Provide a submittal that meets the requirements below for approval.
Coordinate installation schedule with the mechanical contractor and general contractor.
Provide installation of all panels and devices unless otherwise stated.
Provide power for panels and control devices.
Provide 120VAC circuits, wiring, and raceway as necessary to power all controllers and controls components. Power shall be provided from available circuit(s) within the nearest available electric distribution panel(s).
Provide all low voltage control wiring and raceway for the DDC system.
Provide miscellaneous control wiring for HVAC and related systems regardless of voltage.
Provide engineering and technician labor to program and commission software for each system and operator interface. Submit commissioning reports for approval.
Participate in commissioning for all equipment that is integrated into the BAS (refer to commissioning sections of the equipment or systems in other parts of this specification).
Provide testing, demonstration and training as specified below.

SUBMITTALS

Qualification Data:

Systems Provider Qualification Data:

Resume of project manager assigned to Project.
Resumes of application engineering staff and technicians assigned to Project.
Descriptions of past projects completed, demonstrating required experience with projects of similar scope, size, and complexity.

Manufacturer's qualification data.


Product Data:

Include manufacturer's technical literature for each control device. Indicate dimensions, capacities, performance characteristics, electrical characteristics, finishes for materials, and installation and startup instructions for each type of product indicated.
Include ASHRAE BACnet Conformance documents for each DDC system component (panel, zone controller, field devices, and operator workstation) proposed including the following:

PICS Document
BACnet Testing Laboratories Product Listing
BACnet Testing Laboratories Conformance Certificate

Shop Drawings: Detail equipment assemblies and indicate dimensions, weights, loads, required clearances, method of field assembly, components, and location and size of each field connection.

Schematic flow diagrams showing fans, pumps, coils, dampers, valves, and control devices.
Wiring Diagrams: Power, signal, and control wiring. Differentiate between manufacturer-installed and field-installed wiring.
Details of control panel faces, including controls, instruments, and labeling.
Written description of sequence of operation.
Schedule of dampers including size, leakage, and flow characteristics.
Schedule of valves including leakage and flow characteristics.
Trunk cable schematic showing programmable control unit locations and trunk data conductors.
Listing of connected data points, including connected control unit and input device. Input/output point summary with recommended set points.
System graphics indicating monitored systems, data (connected and calculated) point addresses, and operator notations.
System configuration showing peripheral devices, batteries, power supplies, diagrams, modems, and interconnections.
Bill of materials to identify each control device.
A complete set of shop drawings shall be properly identified with the Engineer’s project number and title. Shop drawings shall be 11” x 17” size (minimum).
Show interface with Work under other Contracts. Clearly illustrate, identify and define all components, assemblies, subsystems, and systems; relationship, interface, function, action, setting accuracy, range, sequence of operation, normal and abnormal conditions.

Commissioning Reports: Indicate results of startup and testing commissioning requirements. Submit copies of checklists.

Maintenance Data: For equipment to include in the maintenance manuals specified in Division 01.

Warranties: Special warranties specified in this Section.

No work shall be executed until the final submittals are approved by the project AE.

Project Record Documents: Record actual locations of control components, including control units, thermostats, and sensors. Revise and submit Shop Drawings to reflect actual installation and operating sequences.

COORDINATION

Coordinate location of thermostats, humidistats, and other exposed control sensors with plans and room details prior to installation.

Coordinate with the Mechanical Contractor for equipment provided with packaged controls including but not limited to field installation, wiring, and configuration of any supporting devices as necessary, and to complete integration to packaged unit controllers where indicated.


Coordinate with any auxiliary systems contractors to complete integration of auxiliary systems (i.e. Laboratory Controls, Lighting Controls, Power Monitoring, Security, etc.) into the central site Operator Interface System.

Coordinate locations and requirements for IT Data connections with the Electrical/Technology Contractor.

ACCEPTABLE MECHANICAL SYSTEMS CONTROLS CONTRACTORS

Acceptable Mechanical Systems Controls Contractors, subject to compliance with requirements of this specification and the project Drawings. Substitutions are not acceptable:

Johnson Controls, Inc.

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Installer Qualifications: An experienced installer who is a certified installer of the automatic control system manufacturer for both installation and maintenance of units required for this Project, including a minimum of 2 years of documented experience with projects of similar scope and complexity.

Manufacturer Qualifications: A company experienced in manufacturing automatic temperature-control systems like those indicated for this Project and with a record of successful in-service performance, including a minimum of 5 years of documented experience.

Install all BAS components, devices, and wiring in compliance with NEC and all local electrical codes.

Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, Article 100, by a testing agency acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction, and marked for intended use.

Comply with NFPA 90A, "Installation of Air Conditioning and Ventilation Systems."

Comply with ASHRAE 135 for DDC system control components.

DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING

In strict compliance with the manufacturer’s written instructions and recommendations, materials shall be provided to ensure that all equipment and components are completely protected from damage, dirt, or weather during shipping, storage, prior to installation, and after installation for the duration of the construction activities.

Factory-Mounted Components: Where control devices specified in this Section are indicated to be factory mounted on equipment, arrange for shipping of control devices to unit manufacturer.

WARRANTY

Contractor guarantees that this installation is free from defects and agrees to replace or repair, free of any charge to the satisfaction of the Owner's Representative any part of this installation including all components, parts and assemblies of the System which may fail within a period of one (1) year after final acceptance, provided that such failure is due to defects in the materials or workmanship or due to a failure to follow the specifications and drawings. The Contractor shall file with the Owner all guarantees from the equipment manufacturers and what operating conditions and performance capacities they are based on.

The Contractor shall initiate the warranty period by formally transmitting to the Owner commencement notification of the period for the system and devices accepted.


PART 2 - PRODUCTS

MANUFACTURERS

Available Manufacturers of DDC Controllers and accessories, subject to compliance with requirements of this specification and the project Drawings:

Johnson Controls, Inc.

GENERAL

The MSCC shall provide a complete mechanical controls system including but not limited to programming, DDC controllers, software, sensors, transmitters, control valves, dampers, power supplies and wiring, network, gateways, routers, and all other devices required for a complete system.

The MSCC shall update the existing Owner Johnson Controls BAS Operator Interface System (OIS) as necessary to facilitate remote monitoring and control of mechanical controls systems including but not limited to developed system graphics, point monitoring, point commanding, point trending, equipment operation schedule management, and system alarm configuration and annunciation. The MSCC shall provide a BACnet IP and/or MSTP field/floor level network or networks and shall connect all field devices to a BACnet B-BC controller or controllers. The B-BC controller(s) shall communicate with the BAS OIS server via the Owner’s IP network.

The system shall be modular in nature and shall permit expansion of both capacity and functionality through the addition of sensors, actuators, DDC Controllers, expansion modules, and operator devices.

System network architecture shall be completed such that each BAS controller shall operate independently by performing its own specified control, I/O, and data collection. The failure of any single component or network connection shall not interrupt the execution of control strategies at other operational devices.

Systems requiring multiple controllers (i.e. large chilled water plants) shall not utilize the Owner IP network for communication between common system controllers.

All controllers within a building shall be able to access any data from, or send control commands directly to, any other DDC controller or combination of controllers in the same building without dependence upon a central processing device (peer-to-peer).

All connected devices and systems must meet minimum Owner IT security requirements. The MSCC is responsible for remediation of any network security vulnerabilities identified by the Owner’s IT department during the construction period and up to 1 year after project substantial completion.

All provided controls devices and systems shall be fully serviceable by Owner service technicians. The MSCC shall provide any applicable software tools, programs, and databases to the Owner service team as necessary to allow the Owner to self-perform full service and operation.

OPERATOR INTERFACE SYSTEM

General:

The MSCC shall complete systems integration of all new controls into the existing Owner centralized Johnson Controls BAS Operator Interface System (OIS) to facilitate remote monitoring and control of mechanical controls system including but not limited to developed system graphics, point monitoring, point commanding, point trending, equipment operation schedule management, and system alarm configuration and annunciation. MSCC shall upgrade existing OIS as necessary to facilitate systems integration.The MSCC shall review site network security requirements with the Owner’s designated IT Support contact person and shall provide network security software and hardware components as necessary to meet site security requirements. Additionally, the MSCC shall


provide network security software and hardware components as necessary to properly secure the BAS network and devices from other LAN connected devices.

Systems Integration: The MSCC shall complete integration of all new mechanical controls devices and devices indicated in the project Drawings and Specifications into the common central OIS, including but not limited to Mechanical Systems Controls, Laboratory Controls, Lighting Controls, Power Monitoring, Fire Alarm System, and Security Systems.

Points: Available points from connected field devices shall be integrated into the central OIS as follows:

Mechanical Infrastructure Systems: Integrate all available points
Mechanical Terminal Equipment and Packaged Equipment Controllers: Integrate all physical device input and output points, as well as system virtual setpoints and other control points as necessary to enable appropriate equipment operation and monitoring by central system operators. All available system points are not required for integration.

Graphics: Graphics shall be created and organized to allow a system operator to fully navigate system graphics via graphic buttons. Graphics shall include the following:

Homepage including a map view of and click link buttons to all Owner sites connected to OIS.
Homepage for each building including building photograph and click button links to all connected central building equipment, or equipment summary pages, and links to building floorplan graphics.
Graphics shall include uploaded building key plan style floorplans for all building floors including room numbers. Floorplan graphics shall include key information (i.e.. room temperature) from and click button links to terminal equipment associated with each room.
Do not display extraneous points (not pertinent) on viewable graphics or display screens.
Written sequence of operation shall be included and shall be click linked to the associated equipment or system graphic for reference.
For each building, include a comprehensive network architecture riser diagram including all connected devices for the site and showing connection to the central OIS server. Diagram shall indicate the active connectivity status of each connected device.
All control contractor as built documents and product cut sheets shall be converted into .pdf files and made available through a link on the OIS graphics.
Data to be displayed within a unique graphic shall be assignable regardless of physical hardware address, communication channel or point type. Graphics shall be on-line programmable and under password access control. Points shall be assignable to multiple graphics where necessary to facilitate operator understanding of system operation and where specified. Graphics shall also contain calculated or "software" points. Each physical point and each point assigned to a graphic shall be assigned an English descriptor for use in reports.
Points shall be displayed with dynamic data provided by the system with appropriate text descriptor, status or value, and engineering unit. Coloration shall be used to designate alarm states, and status including point connectivity and override status. Coloration shall be variable for each class of points, as chosen by the Owner.
Graphics shall include direct links to applicable system trend reports and views.
An on-line "help" utility shall be provided to facilitate operator training and understanding. The "help" utility shall contain text and graphics to clarify system operation. At a minimum, help shall be available for every menu item and dialogue box.

Trends: System point trends shall be configured for connected systems as follows:

Central Mechanical Equipment: Include trending for all main system points such as temperature, pressure, flow, valve command, damper command, setpoints, motor command and status, etc. Trends shall be change of value (COV) based including a maximum 1 hour time interval between recorded point values.


Terminal Mechanical Equipment: Include trending for current room temperature, any unique terminal monitoring points such as carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, etc., and any other critical terminal monitoring points as necessary.
Auxiliary Systems: Include minimum baseline trending of key system operational and monitoring points.

Alarms: Configure system alarms for monitoring of all key operational parameters of all central mechanical systems and auxiliary systems, and terminal equipment monitoring points as necessary. Several examples of required system alarm points are included below:

Fan or pump motor status does not match enable command for 10 seconds
Boiler or chiller status does not match enable command for 10 seconds
Equipment general alarm point has changed state to alarm status
Air Handling Unit freezestat has tripped
Air Handling Unit discharge air temperature is +/-5°F of setpoint during occupied mode
Air Handling Unit end of duct static pressure is +/-0.5” WC of setpoint during occupied mode
Air Handling Unit return air relative humidity is >70%RH during occupied mode
Hydronic system liquid temperature is +/-5°F of setpoint when the system is enabled
Hydronic system pressure is +/-5 psi of setpoint when the system is enabled
Space/room temperature is <50°F or >90°F
Area lighting status does not match enable command for 10 seconds

DDC CONTROLLERS AND ASSOCIATED COMPONENTS

DDC Controllers:

All BAS controllers shall use the latest version of ANSI/ASHRAE Standard 135 BACnet standard for communications, have passed BACnet Testing Laboratories (BTL) certification and be listed as compliant with UL916 Standard for Energy Management Equipment. BAS controllers used in smoke control applications must also be listed as compliant with UL864 Standard for Control Units and Accessories for Fire Alarm Systems.
All controllers shall be listed by BTL as conforming to the required standard device profile and support all of the minimum required BACnet Interoperability Building Blocks (BIBBs) associated with this device profile.
BAS controller types shall be one of three types, a BACnet Building Controller (B-BC), a BACnet Advanced Application Specific Controller (B-AAC) or a BACnet Application Specific Controllers (B- ASC).

Building Controllers (B-BC) shall be used for all major mechanical equipment and/or systems (i.e. chilled water, heating hot water, large AHU’s, etc.).
Advanced Application Specific Controllers (B-AAC) shall be used, as an extension of a B- BC’s performance and capacity, for control of all medium and small mechanical systems and/or terminal equipment.
Application Specific Controllers (B-ASC) shall only be allowed to be used on terminal equipment including VAV boxes, FCU’s, etc.

BACnet Building Controller (B-BC):

Provide controllers conforming to the latest version of ANSI/ASHRAE 135 BACnet Building Controller (B-BC) standard device profile and support all of the minimum required BACnet Interoperability Building Blocks (BIBBs) associated with this device profile.
Controllers shall support Internet Protocol (IP) for communications to other BC’s and the OIS and MS/TP communication to B-AAC’s and B-ASC’s.


Controllers shall have a 32 bit processor with an EEPROM, flash driven operating system. They shall be multi-tasking, multi-user, real-time digital control processors and permit I/O expansion for control / monitoring of up to 48 I/O. Controller size shall be sufficient to fully meet the requirements of this specification. Controllers shall be fully programmable while supporting standard energy management functions, including but not limited to:

Alarm detection and reporting
Automatic Daylight Saving Time switchover
Calendar-based scheduling
Closed loop PID control
Duty cycling
Economizer control
Equipment scheduling, optimization and sequencing
Event scheduling
Historical trend collection
Holiday scheduling
Logical programming
Reset schedules
Night setback control
Peak Demand Limiting (PDL)
Start-Stop Time Optimization (SSTO)
Temperature-compensated duty cycling
Temporary schedule override

Provide controller with integral power switch. If an integral switch is not provided by the manufacturer, the MSCC shall provide a separate dedicated transformer and switch within each enclosure for each controller present.
The operator shall have the ability to manually override automatic or centrally executed commands at the Building Controller via local, point discrete, hand/off/auto operator override switches for digital control type points and gradual switches for analog control type points. These override switches shall be operable whether the panel processor is operational or not.
Controllers shall provide local LED status indication for power, communications, status and each digital output for constant, up-to-date verification of all point conditions without the need for an operator I/O device.
All points associated with a given mechanical system (i.e., an air handling unit) will be controlled from a single Building Controller or point expansion panel(s) from the respective master. All expansion modules shall be located in the building controller enclosure or an attached enclosure. No points from a given mechanical system may be distributed among multiple panels - points must be run back to a single Building Controller dedicated to that mechanical system. Multiple mechanical systems shall be allowed on a single controller. Closed-loop control must never depend upon network communications. All inputs, program sequences, and outputs for any single BAS control loop shall reside in the same Building Controller.
A variety of historical data collection utilities shall be provided for manual or automatic sampling, storing and displaying system point data.

Building Controllers shall store point history data for selected analog and digital inputs and outputs:

Building Controllers shall also provide high resolution sampling capability for verification of control loop performance. Operator-initiated automatic and manual loop tuning algorithms shall be provided for operator-selected PID control. Provide capability to view or print trend and tuning reports.

Loop tuning shall be capable of being initiated either locally at the Building Controller or from a network workstation. For all loop tuning functions, access shall be limited to authorized personnel through password protection.


Provide controllers that, upon full system power recovery, all clocks shall be automatically synchronized, and all controlled equipment shall be automatically re-started based on correct clock time and sequence of operation.
Provide additional controllers or I/O modules if necessary, in each BAS panel so that each panel has at least 20% spare universal I/O capacity for connection of future points. Provide all processors, power supplies, and communication controllers so that the implementation of adding a point to the spare point location only requires the addition of the appropriate expansion modules, sensors/actuators and/or field wiring/tubing.
Controllers shall provide at least one data communication port for operation of operator I/O devices such as portable laptop operator's terminals. Controllers shall allow temporary use of portable devices without interrupting the normal operation of permanently connected printers or terminals. A USB port shall alternatively be available to support local HMI tools connection.
Field bus adaptors may be used, as an extension of the B-BC, to facilitate communication between the B-BC and remote field devices (sensors, actuators). Adaptors shall be microprocessor based and utilize advanced diagnostics and configuration. Adaptor shall be housed in panel or junction box enclosure.
Any provided JACE controllers shall be by Tridium Vykon and shall be fully open for Owner use and configuration without the need for any proprietary software or licenses.

BACnet Advanced Application Specific Controller (B-AAC):

Provide controllers conforming to the latest version of ANSI/ASHRAE 135 BACnet Advanced Application Specific Controller (B-AAC) standard device profile and support all of the minimum required BACnet Interoperability Building Blocks (BIBBs) associated with this device profile.
Controllers shall support MS/TP communication to B-BC’s and other B-AAC’s and B-ASC’s. Also acceptable are B-AAC controllers that support Internet Protocol (IP) for communications to other BC’s/ AAC’s and the OIS and MS/TP communication to B-AAC’s/ ASC’s.
Controller shall be a microprocessor-based, 32 bit, multi-tasking, real-time digital control processor capable of stand-alone operation for medium sized mechanical systems and/ or control of roof-top units, VAV terminal units, CAV terminal units, dual-duct terminal units, fan- coil units, heat pump units.

If the hardware point requirements of any medium-sized system should exceed the I/O configuration of available B-AAC offerings then a B-BC must be used. Control of one piece of mechanical equipment may not be performed by more than one controller.

Controllers shall be peer-to-peer devices with hand/off/auto switches for each digital output. Switch position shall be supervised in order to inform the system that automatic control has been overridden. Switches will only be required for non-terminal applications (not required for VAVs, CAV’s and other above terminal devices). All inputs and outputs shall be of the universal type, allowing for additional system flexibility.
Each controller shall support its own real-time operating system. Controllers without real-time clock functionality will only be permitted for use on terminal or unitary equipment such as VAV boxes, fan coil units and auxiliary monitoring and control.
Provide each controller with sufficient memory to accommodate point databases and operating programs. All databases and programs shall be stored in non-volatile EEPROM. The controllers shall be able to return to full normal operation without user intervention after a power failure of unlimited duration.
Controllers must be fully programmable. All programs shall be field-customized to meet the user's exact control strategy requirements. Controllers utilizing pre-packaged or canned programs shall not be acceptable.
All points used for a single mechanical system shall be connected to the same B-AAC. Points used for control loop reset based on outside air, or space/zone temperature, or extremely remote differential pressure sensors on slow acting control loops are exempt from this requirement.


Provide spare additional I/O such that future use of spare capacity shall require providing only the field device, field wiring, point database definition and operational sequence programming changes as required. Additional point modules may be required to implement use of these spare points.

Provide at least one (1) spare universal input and one (1) spare universal output or 15% spare I/O of the total capacity of each B-AAC whichever is greater.
If B-AAC I/O is not universal then provide at least one (1) spare analog input, one (1) spare digital input, one (1) spare analog output and one (1) spare digital output or 15% spare I/O of the total capacity for each point type of each B-AAC whichever is greater.

BACnet Application Specific Controller (B-ASC):

Provide controllers conforming to the latest version of ANSI/ ASHRAE 135 BACnet Application Specific Controller (B-ASC) standard device profile and support all of the minimum required BACnet Interoperability Building Blocks (BIBBs) associated with this device profile.
Controllers shall support MS/TP communication to B-BC’s, B-AAC’s and other B-ASC’s.
Controller shall be a microprocessor-based, 32 bit, multi-tasking, real-time digital control processor capable of stand-alone operation for control of mechanical terminal units, i.e. VAV terminal units, CAV terminal units, air terminal units, dual-duct terminal units, fan-coil units, heat pump units and roof-top units.
Each controller shall be capable of sharing point information with other B-BC, B-AAC, or B- ASC on a peer-to-peer basis via the BACnet network.
Controllers shall include all point inputs and outputs necessary to perform the specified control sequences. All inputs and outputs shall be of the universal type (outputs may be utilized either as modulating or two-state). Analog outputs shall be industry standard signals such as 24V floating control and 0-10VDC allowing for interface to a variety of modulating actuators.
Provide each controller with sufficient memory to accommodate point databases and operating and application programs. All databases and programs shall be stored in non- volatile EEPROM. The controllers shall be able to return to full normal operation without user intervention after a power failure of unlimited duration.
Each controller shall perform its primary control function independent of other BAS controller communications, or if communication is interrupted. Reversion to a fail-safe mode of operation during network interruption is not acceptable. Controller shall receive its real-time data from the Building Controller time clock to ensure network continuity.
Each controller shall include algorithms incorporating proportional, integral and derivative (PID) values for all applications. All PID values and biases shall be field-adjustable by the user via operator terminals.
Controllers shall provide diagnostic LEDs for power, communications and processor status.
The controller shall continually check the status of its processor and memory circuits
All points used for a single mechanical terminal unit shall be connected to a dedicated B-ASC. Points used for control loop reset based on outside air, or space/zone temperature, or extremely remote differential pressure sensors on slow acting control loops are exempt from this requirement.
Controllers shall perform and manage historical data collection. Minimum sampling time shall be configurable with a minimum sample rate of once per second. Controller shall store point history files for all analog and binary I/O’s.

Controllers used for air terminal units (VAV’s, CAV’s, dual-duct mixing boxes):

Provide electronic damper operators compatible with the controller and the air terminal units provided. Actuator shall utilize a brushless DC operator, min 35 in-lbs. of torque, floating control (unless noted otherwise).
Controllers shall have an internal differential pressure transducer(s) capable of utilizing the total and static pressure signals from the air terminal unit's velocity sensor. Transducer shall be capable of 5% accuracy throughout its range of 0-1”wc. Associated velocity sensor shall be furnished by air terminal unit manufacturer.


Each controller shall have electronic outputs compatible with the electronically operated air terminal unit tempering coil control valve and perimeter radiation control valve where applicable.
Provide a discharge air sensor, mounted on the discharge of the terminal box reheat coil and/ or the outlet of dual duct mixing boxes, interfaced with the controller.
Each controller shall include provisions for automatic calibration of the differential pressure transducer in order to maintain stable control and prevent drift over time. The method of stroking the terminal unit damper to a 0% position shall not be permitted should the controlled space(s) require constant pressurization that would be compromised if the controller would require closing the VAV box damper. MSCC shall provide alternate controllers, programming and/or auxiliary devices (i.e. an ‘auto-zero’ auxiliary device(s) which functions to temporarily disengage the transducer from the air velocity sensor so that a 0 cfm air volume reading is forced without changing the damper position) when serving these spaces to prevent negatively affecting room pressurization.
If coordinated with mechanical contractor, controllers shall be furnished to the unit manufacturer for factory mounting; otherwise, controls shall be field installed.
MSCC shall provide controllers with metal enclosure, complete with conduit knockouts.

Provide and fully implement the following application function (algorithms) in the BAS Panel. The following functions shall be operator assignable to each BAS panel.

Time and Calendar based Scheduled Operation
Automatic daylight savings time switchover
Optimum Start/Stop
Night Cycle Program
Night Purge Program
Reset Program for Set point Adjustment
Ventilation (Economizer) Program
Analog and Binary
Energy Calculations
Software Interlock
Trouble Diagnosis
Direct digital control loops for temperature control functions

Panel Enclosures:

Unitized cabinet with suitable brackets for wall or floor mounting, located adjacent to each system under automatic control. Enclosures shall not be mounted directly on HVAC equipment such as air handling unit housings. Provide common keying for all panels.

Fabricate panels of 0.06 inch thick, furniture-quality steel, or extruded-aluminum alloy, totally enclosed, with hinged doors and keyed lock and with manufacturer's standard shop-painted finish.

Networking Devices:

BACnet IP Routers:

BACnet router between MS/TP and B/IP (BACnet over IP) as well as a BBMD (BACnet Broadcast Management Device) for transportation of BACnet broadcasts over an IP network with several subnets.
Router shall comply with latest version of ASHRAE Standard 135 for communications.
Routers shall be UL864 listed when connected to BACnet MS/TP network segments that contain UL864 listed devices being used in a smoke control application.
Device shall be capable of routing BACnet packets over layer 3 IP network and shall support both the router and BACnet Broadcast Management Device (BBMD) networking options. BBMD shall support registrations by Foreign Devices.


24 VAC power supply required for router(s) shall be provided by the MSCC.
Device shall be password protected with customizable password and security settings.

Power Supplies:

Power to controllers and associated controlled devices shall be 24 VAC, provided by the MSCC. Unless otherwise noted, power source (i.e. normal vs. emergency power) shall match that of the equipment being controlled.
Provide each DDC panel with a line filter, surge suppressor, electrical disconnect, control fuse, and control transformer. All sized and provided by the MSCC.
Provide fully enclosed power supplies located inside control enclosures with external 24 Vac terminals, on/off control, equipment overcurrent protection, power indication, high/low voltage separation, and convenience 120VAC outlets.
Provide insulated, modular, feed-through, clamp-style terminal blocks suitable for rail-mounting with end plates and partitions for the termination of all field wiring in control enclosures. Field wiring to equipment with integral terminals and/or unitary equipment (i.e., VAV’s, EF’s, etc.) shall not be required to have terminal blocks.
Provide a minimum of 72 battery backup hours for complete system RAM memory and clock, with automatic battery charger. The backup power source shall have sufficient capacity to maintain volatile memory in event of an AC power failure.

ACTUATORS AND OPERATORS

Electric Motors: Size to operate with sufficient reserve power to provide smooth modulating action or two- position action as indicated.

Permanent Split-Capacitor or Shaded-Pole Type: Gear trains completely oil immersed and sealed. Equip spring-return motors with integral spiral-spring mechanism in housings designed for easy removal for service or adjustment of limit switches, auxiliary switches, or feedback potentiometer.
Non-spring Return Motors for Valves Larger than NPS 2-1/2: Size for running torque of 150 in. x lbf and breakaway torque of 300 in. x lbf.
Spring-Return Motors for Valves Larger than NPS 2-1/2: Size for running and breakaway torque of 150 in. x lbf.
Non-spring Return Motors for Dampers Larger than 25 Sq. Ft.: Size for running torque of 150 in. x lbf and breakaway torque of 300 in. x lbf.
Spring-Return Motors for Dampers Larger than 25 Sq. Ft.: Size for running and breakaway torque of 150 in. x lbf.

Electronic Damper or Large-Valve Actuators: Direct-coupled type designed for minimum 60,000 full-stroke cycles at rated torque.

Valves: Size for torque required for valve close-off at maximum pump differential pressure.
Dampers: Size for running torque calculated as follows:

Parallel-Blade Damper with Edge Seals: 7 inch pounds/sq. ft. of damper.
Opposed-Blade Damper with Edge Seals: 5 inch pounds/sq. ft. of damper.
Parallel-Blade Damper without Edge Seals: 4 inch pounds/sq. ft of damper.
Opposed-Blade Damper without Edge Seals: 3 inch pounds/sq. ft. of damper.
Dampers with 2 to 3 Inches wg of Pressure Drop or Face Velocities of 1,000 to 2,500 FPM: Multiply the minimum full-stroke cycles above by 1.5.
Dampers with 3 to 4 Inches wg of Pressure Drop or Face Velocities of 2,500 to 3,000 FPM: Multiply the minimum full-stroke cycles above by 2.0.

Coupling: V-bolt and V-shaped, toothed cradle.
Overload Protection: Electronic overload or digital rotation-sensing circuitry.
Fail-Safe Operation: Mechanical, spring-return mechanism. Provide external, manual gear release on non-spring-return actuators.
Temperature Rating: Minus 22 to plus 122 deg F.


Temperature Rating (Smoke Dampers): Minus 22 to plus 250 deg F.
Run Time: Maximum 90 seconds
Fast Acting Actuator Run Time: Maximum 10 seconds

CONTROL VALVES

Valves shall be provided according to the details of this section, and in compliance with the related specification section “Valves”.

Valves shall be factory fabricated of type, body material, and pressure class based on maximum pressure and temperature rating of piping system, unless otherwise indicated.

Valves shall be sized based on indicated system design flowrates, pressures, and temperatures.

Valves and actuators shall be selected with suitable close-off pressures for the application.

Unless indicated otherwise, valve bodies NPS 2 inches and smaller shall be bronze with screwed end connections. Valve bodies NPS 2-1/2 inches and larger shall be cast iron with flanged end connections.

Manufacturer: Unless noted otherwise, valves shall be Belimo, Honeywell, Johnson, Siemens, or approved equal.

Ball Valves (Water):

Fluid: Chilled or hot water (up to 50% glycol)
Pressure rating: 125 psi water
Temperature rating: 250°F water
Materials:

Valve body: Bronze
Seat: PTFE
Seals: EPDM
Ball: Nickel or chrome plated brass

Sizing: 5 psig maximum pressure drop at design flow rate.
Modulating valve flow characteristics: Two-way valves shall have equal percentage characteristics; three-way valves shall have linear characteristics.

Globe Valves (Water):

Fluid: Chilled or hot water (up to 50% glycol) or steam
Pressure rating: 125 psi
Temperature rating: 250°F (water), 338°F (steam)
Materials:

Valve body: Bronze (2 inch and smaller), cast iron (2-1/2” and larger)
Seat: Stainless steel, Bronze (water 2 inch and smaller)
Seals: EPDM

Sizing: 5 psig maximum pressure drop at design flow rate.
Modulating valve flow characteristics: Two-way valves shall have equal percentage characteristics; three-way hydronic valves shall have linear characteristics.

Resilient Seated Butterfly Valves:

Fluid: Chilled or hot water (up to 50% glycol)
Pressure rating: 125 psi


Temperature rating: 250°F
Rangeability: Minimum 10:1
Materials:

Valve body: Ductile iron, full lug
Disc: Stainless steel
Shaft: Stainless steel
Seat: EPDM
Seals: EPDM

Sizing: 5 psig maximum pressure drop at design flow rate.

High Performance Butterfly Valves (Water):

Fluid: Chilled or hot water (up to 50% glycol)
Pressure rating: 125 psi
Temperature rating: 250°F (water)
Rangeability: Minimum 100:1
Materials:

Valve body: Carbon steel, full lug
Disc: 316 stainless steel
Shaft: Stainless steel
Seat: RTFE
Seals: TFE

Sizing: 5 psig maximum pressure drop at design flow rate.

Self-Contained Thermostatic Radiator Control Valve:

Fluid: Hot water (up to 50% glycol) or steam
Pressure rating: 125 psi
Temperature rating: 250°F
Valve shall be selected and sized accordingly for the applicable Hot Water (including applicable % glycol mixture) or Steam system application.
Valve body shall include packing gland assembly that is replaceable while the system is in operation.
Valve shall be provided with integral thermostatic operator including an ambient air temperature sensor and space temperature setpoint adjustment dial capable with a setpoint range of at least 60 deg F to 85 deg F.
Contractor shall review the application and shall provide valve mounted operator and dial or remote mounted dial and sensor with capillary tube as necessary for proper temperature control and user temperature adjustment access.
Manufacturer: Danfoss (or approved equal)

Control Valve Systems Application:

Hydronic heating or chilled water:

2 position valves:

2 inch and smaller: Ball valve
2-1/2 inch and larger: Resilient seated butterfly valve


Modulating valves:

2 inch and smaller: Ball valve
1 inch to 6 inch: Globe valve
4 inch and larger: High performance butterfly valve


CONTROL DAMPERS

Dampers: AMCA-rated, airfoil type parallel and opposed-blade design by an ISO 9001 accredited manufacturer; 13 gauge minimum, galvanized-steel frames; damper blades shall not be less than 16 gauge galvanized steel or aluminum with maximum blade size of 8 inches wide and 48 inches long.

Unless otherwise noted, dampers intended for two position operation shall be parallel blade, and dampers intended for modulating control shall be opposed blade.
Face and bypass dampers shall be sized to pass 100% of the associated unit rated airflow.
Provide required drive axles, linkage, jackshafts, and accessories for proper damper operation. All linkages shall be located outside of the airstream.
Damper blades, frames, linkages, jackshafts and other parts of the damper actuation system shall not distort or rack during operation.
Dampers shall close tightly, and operate in a smooth, hesitation and slack-free manner over the entire range of travel, at the maximum air pressure and velocity at the mounting location.
Multiple section dampers shall operate in unison section-to-section.
Dampers shall include blade and edge seals as necessary to achieve maximum leakage of 4 CFM per sq. ft. of damper area at 1.0” WC pressure.
Operating Temperature Range: From minus 40 to plus 200 deg F.
Static Pressure Rating: Shall be selected to withstand the maximum pressure to be encountered upon closure at the installation location, but not less than 4.0” WC.
Dampers shall be supported by properly reinforcing the ductwork at damper locations to carry the weight of the dampers, or shall be supported independent of ductwork, from the structure or floor as conditions at the site dictate. Both sides of damper frame shall be caulked.
Dampers which will be exposed directly to weather shall have stainless steel axles, bearings, bushings, and fittings. Dampers which open directly to outdoors from a room such as mechanical or electrical room ventilation, shall include 1" of 1-1/2 lb. density insulation sandwiched in 16 gauge zinc coated steel blades. Bearings shall be oilite bronze.
Manufacturers: Dampers shall be Ruskin, Vent Products, or approved equal. Use insulated dampers as indicated on the drawings.

TEMPERATURE AND HUMIDITY INSTRUMENTS

Temperature Sensors:

Resistance Temperature Detectors (RTD): Platinum.

Single point duct mounted RTD shall be rigid bulb type, with probe length selected accordingly for measurement near center of the duct cross sectional area
Averaging point duct mounted RTD sensor probe(s) shall be selected to appropriately cover the full duct/coil cross sectional area at the location of installation
Outside air RTD shall have sun shield to minimize solar effects and shall be mounted to minimize building outside air film effects
Immersion Type - shall be suitable for immersion into fluids in pipes with separable well and heat transfer compound, which shall be compatible with the sensors
Space temperature with a range of 55 to 95 degF, plus or minus 0.5 degF resolution, for conditioned space. Space temperature sensors installed at building exterior entrances shall include temperature sensing down to 20 degF for freeze risk monitoring.
Duct temperature with a range of 20 to 120 degF, plus or minus 0.5 degF resolution
Outside Air (OA) temperature with a range of minus 40 to plus 130 degF, plus or minus 2 degF resolution


Liquid immersion temperature sensors shall include probe with SS well, and weather tight enclosure. Sensors shall include a calibrated span of 20 to 120 degF or 30 to 250 degF for heating applications.

Sensors installed in wet service locations (i.e. natatorium, piping tunnels, etc.) shall be waterproof and shall be resistant to chlorine and other cleaning agents. Sensors shall have rust proof and waterproof covers.

Low-Limit Temperature Protection (Freeze-Stat):

Freeze detection controller shall open a switch (auxiliary contact for BAS alarm indication) in series with fan starter holding coil when temperature falls to controller setpoint. Controller shall be equipped with a minimum of 20 feet of copper capillary tube, which shall be placed to the downstream face of the protected coil. Controller shall be manually reset and shall open the circuit when any 12" length of the capillary reaches setting temperature. Install capillary in a horizontal pattern only. Use multiple detectors as required, do not exceed the manufacturer’s maximum coverage area. Use one thermostat for every 20 sq. ft. of coil surface. Install freezestat on face and bypass coils precisely per the face and bypass manufacturer's instructions. The capillary tube shall cover only one vertical section of coil and shall not extend across any bypass portion.

Humidity Sensors:

Humidity sensor shall use a thin film capacitive sensing element to measure the relative humidity (RH) over a range of 0% to 100% RH. Accuracy shall be +/-2% RH.
Humidity transmitters shall be suitable for one or more of the following mounting methods:

Room Type: Shall be suitable for wall mounting with enclosure where located in a finished space.
Insertion Type: Shall be suitable for insertion into air ducts at any angle and shall have a minimum insertion of 6 inches.

Sensors installed in wet service locations (i.e. natatorium, piping tunnels, etc.) shall be waterproof and shall be resistant to chlorine and other cleaning agents. Sensors shall have rust proof and waterproof covers.

Thermostat:

DDC Thermostat: Thermostat for connection to DDC controllers.

Space temperature sensor with a range of 55 to 95 degF, plus or minus 0.5 degF resolution. Thermostats installed at building exterior entrances shall include temperature sensing down to 20 degF for freeze risk monitoring.
Digital temperature display
Temperature setpoint adjustment
Override button
Provide with auxiliary communications port to allow remote connection to DDC controllers.
Thermostat shall be provided with additional options and features as necessary to accommodate functions detailed in the project drawings.

Combination Thermostat and Fan Switches: Line-voltage thermostat with two-position, push-button or lever-operated fan switch. These line voltage thermostats control heating, cooling or year round air conditioning units in commercial, industrial or residential installations. Typical uses are for unit heaters, fan coils, blast coils, refrigerated storage room, electric heat, duct furnaces, greenhouses, etc.

Concealed auto-off-fan selector switch
Thermostat shall be placed where air circulates around it freely


Never install the thermostat on or near an outside wall
Keep the thermostat away from windows and doors
Do not locate the thermostat away from windows and doors
Do not locate the thermostat too close to a strong light or any other false source of heat such as direct sunlight, steam lines, etc.
Mount the thermostat on a post or partitioning wall, but make sure that there are no pipes or ductwork in that wall or in the other side of the wall
Mount in a vertical position

Electric solid-state, microcomputer-based room thermostat.

Automatic switching from heating to cooling
Preferential rate control to minimize overshoot and deviation from set point
Set up for four separate temperatures per day
Instant override of set point for continuous or timed period from 1 hour to 31 days
Short-cycle protection
Programming based on [weekdays, Saturdays and Sundays] [every day of week]
Selection features include deg F or deg C display, 12- or 24-hour clock, keyboard disable, remote sensor, fan on-auto
Battery replacement without program loss
Thermostat display features include the following:

Time of day
Actual room temperature
Programmed temperature
Programmed time
Duration of timed override
Day of week
System mode indications include "heating," "off," "fan auto," and "fan on"

Low-Voltage, On-Off Thermostats: NEMA DC 3, 24-V, bimetal-operated, mercury-switch type, with adjustable or fixed anticipation heater.
Line-Voltage, On-Off Thermostats: Bimetal-actuated, open contact or bellows-actuated, enclosed, snap-switch type, or equivalent solid-state type, with heat anticipator, integral manual on-off-auto selector switch.

Equip thermostats, which control electric heating loads directly, with off position on dial wired to break ungrounded conductors.

Dead Band: Maximum 2 deg F.

Immersion Thermostat: Remote-bulb or bimetal rod-and-tube type, proportioning action with adjustable throttling range and adjustable set point.
Airstream Thermostats: Two-pipe, fully proportional, single-temperature type, with adjustable set point in middle of range and adjustable throttling range, plug-in test fitting or permanent pressure gage, remote bulb, bimetal rod and tube, or averaging element.
Unless otherwise noted, thermostats and space sensors shall not be located on exterior walls. When installation on exterior walls is required, devices shall be provided with insulated mounting bases.

Outside air sensors shall be installed away from exhaust or relief vents, shall not be installed in an outside air intake, and shall generally be located to provide the best possible sensing of actual outside air conditions, free from influence from the building or operational activities. Sensors shall be installed on a North exterior building wall or an otherwise continuously, year-round shaded location. Outside air temperature sensor shall be provided with a sun shield.


GAS DETECTION INSTRUMENTS AND SYSTEMS

Carbon Dioxide Sensors:

Single detectors, using solid-state infrared sensors, suitable over a temperature range of 32 to 120 deg F, calibrated for 0 to 2 percent, with continuous or averaged reading, 4 to 20 mA output.
Manufacturer: ACI, Telaire, Vaisala, Veris

FLOW INSTRUMENTS

Airflow:

Duct Mounted Airflow Measuring Station:

Provide where indicated, airflow measuring station(s) capable of continuously monitoring the air volume capacities in which they serve.
Individual airflow traverse probes are not acceptable.
Station shall not be provided with integral air straightener, unless required by ductwork location. If installed ductwork cannot facilitate manufacturer recommended straight duct lengths without straightener, Contractor shall submit an RFI to the project Engineer for direction.
Velocity Pressure Type Airflow Measurement:

Each airflow traverse probe mounted within the station shall contain multiple total and static pressure sensors located along its exterior surface, and internally connected to their respective averaging manifolds. The flow sensors shall not protrude beyond the surface of the probe(s), and shall be the offset (Fechheimer) type for static pressure and the chamfered impact type for total pressure measurement. The airflow station's measured accuracy shall not be affected by directional flow having yaw and/or pitch angles up to 30º.
The airflow measuring station(s) shall have a 14 ga. [18 ga. for circular units] galvanized steel, 6" deep welding casing with 90deg connecting flanges. Total and static pressure sensors shall be located at the centers of equal areas (for rectangular ducts) or at equal concentric area centers (for circular ducts) across the station's face area.
Stations shall be AMCA certified and be capable of measuring the airflow rates within an accuracy of ±2% without the use of correction factors. The maximum allowable unrecovered pressure drop caused by the station shall not exceed .025" w.c. at 2000 FPM, or .085" w.c. at 4000 FPM.
The transmitter shall be capable of receiving flow signals (total and static pressure) from an airflow station or probe array and produce dual outputs linear and scaled for air volume, velocity, differential pressure, etc.
The transmitter shall contain an integral multi-line digital display for use during the configuration and calibration process, and to display one transmitter output during normal operating mode. All transmitter configuration, parameter setting, zero and span calibration, plus display formatting and scaling will be performed digitally in the on- board microprocessor via input pushbuttons.
The transmitter will be available in multiple natural spans covering the range of 0.05 IN w.c. to 10.0 IN w.c. with an accuracy of 0.1% of natural span. The transmitter shall be furnished with a transducer automatic zeroing circuit and be capable of maintaining linear output signals on applications requiring 10 to 1 velocity (100 to 1 pressure) turndown.
The transmitter shall be capable of having its operating span electronically selected without having to perform recalibration involving an external pressure source.


Fan Inlet Mounted:

Provide where indicted, airflow probes mounted in the fan inlets capable of continuously measuring the air handling capacity (air volume) of the respective fan(s).
Thermal Dispersion Type Airflow Measurement:

For a single inlet fan, each probe array shall consist of one pair of single-point measuring probes and a single microprocessor based transmitter. For a double inlet fan, each probe array shall consist of two pairs of single-point measuring probes and a single microprocessor based transmitter. The transmitter shall be supplied by the same manufacturer as the probe array(s).
Each probe array shall be assembled using heavy wall anodized aluminum tubing, stainless steel adjustable support struts, stainless steel mounting brackets, and an aerodynamically optimized molded sensing apertures to ensure accurate measurement in angular airflow conditions.
Probe arrays shall be connected to the transmitter using cable of up to 100' in length, included with the transmitter.
Each stand-alone sensing point shall use an ambient temperature thermistor and an externally heated thermistor to determine the point velocity and temperature. Automatic equal area averaging of the individual point measurements shall be performed in the transmitter.
Each airflow sensor shall have an operating range of 0-10,000 FPM, with a NIST traceable accuracy of ±2% of reading for velocity measurement and 0.1ºF for temperature measurement. Individual sensors shall be fully field serviceable without need for field calibration, not requiring that the probe be returned to the Factory for repair and/or calibration.
Each transmitter shall be capable of averaging as many as thirty-two (32) sensors.
The transmitter will have a high visibility backlit LCD for display of either the averaged or individual sensor airflow and temperature measurements, in user selectable units of measure. The transmitter shall be factory configured to output duct air volume for plug and play operation.
All transmitter configuration, scaling, and diagnostic functions shall be performed by means of a password protected, cover mounted membrane keypad.
The transmitter outputs shall be dual analog (4-20mA, 0-5VDC or 0-10VDC) for airflow and temperature.
The operating temperature range of the transmitter shall be from -20º to 140ºF. The transmitter shall be located where it will be sheltered from water or weather.
Input power to each transmitter shall be 24VAC/24VDC.
The transmitter shall be provided with interconnect cable for remote mounting up to 100’ away.
When installed per the manufacturer’s minimum installation requirements, the transmitter with probe array shall measure with an accuracy of ±3-10% of actual airflow as installed or within ±2-3% of actual flow with field calibration.
Manufacturer: Ebtron, Air Monitor

Liquid Flow:

Inline Electromagnetic Type Flowmeter:

Unless indicated otherwise, all liquid flowmeters shall be Inline Electromagnetic Type.
The meter system shall consist of a primary flow sensor and remote mounted transmitter. The flow sensor shall be equipped with 150-lb. flanges. The meter system shall be installed with all necessary grounding components and gaskets per manufacturer’s instructions. The meter shall be capable of bi-directional operation. The meter shall be sized appropriately for the range of flow for the system. The electrodes shall be SS or Hasteloy C. The transmitter shall be provided with a remote mounting bracket, cable, integral LCD display, NEMA 4X housing, shall indicate flow rate and totalize flow, shall have an isolated 2-wire 420 mA linear output flow rate signal, and shall have a pulsed output signal for totalization. The transmitter


shall be capable of being field calibrated and reprogrammed from the outside housing via magnetic probe or security protected integral keypad menu switching. Unit electronics shall have noise immunity. The primary flow sensor and transmitter shall be mounted in accessible locations. Unit shall have the capability to maintain flow total in non-volatile memory. The flowmeter and transmitter as a unit shall have the following minimum characteristics:

Flowmeter Liner:

Heating hot water, domestic hot water, and other water systems operating at or above 110°F: Teflon
Chilled water, domestic cold water, and other water systems operating below 110°F: Polyurethane
Steam condensate: Teflon to 300°F, Ceramic over 300°F, and as suitable for the expected fluid conditions

Accuracy:

At 1 to 33 feet per second velocity: ±0.5% of rate.
At 0.3 feet per second velocity: ±2% of rate.

Each unit shall be factory calibrated for the specified flow and shall be calibrated in both directions if the application is bi-directional. Calibration shall be a minimum of three point. Specific performance test data shall be furnished with the meter.
Each meter shall provide two analog 4-20 mA signals or a single 4-20 mA signal and a digital contact closure on reverse flow.
Meters for steam condensate shall be capable of sensing with condensate conductivity down to 6 µS/cm.

Provide a phenolic tag for each transmitter to identify service and meter ID number
Approved Manufacturers:

ABB
Badger Meter
Krohne
Onicon
Rosemount
Siemens

Insertion Electromagnetic Type Flowmeter:

Unless noted otherwise, Insertion Electromagnetic Type Flowmeters shall only be acceptable in applications where a flowmeter is to be installed in existing piping.
Provide an insertion electromagnetic flowmeter complete with NIST traceable, wet calibrated flow-measuring element, remote mounted transmitter, installation valves, installation depth gage and calibration certificate. Flowmeter shall be wet tappable, allowing insertion and removal from the flow stream without system shutdown.
Contractor shall be responsible for selecting the flowmeter options submitted based on the application. Flowmeter shall be constructed, calibrated and scaled for the intended application in terms of pipe size, pipe material, installation requirements, expected flow rate, ambient conditions and fluid characteristics which include but are not limited to pressure, temperature, conductivity and viscosity.
Electromagnetic sensing element shall utilize two sets of diametrically opposed electrodes to measure the average flow rate velocity.
Wetted components shall be constructed of 316L stainless steel with attached tag indicating calibration information.
Maximum Pressure Rating: 400 psig.
Maximum Temperature Rating: 200 deg F.


End Connections for NPS 1.25” and Larger: 1” Male NPT Hot Tap Adapter fitting. Installation through 1” full port isolation valve, minimum.
Flow Range:	Flow-measuring element and transmitter shall cover operating range of equipment or system served.
Accuracy: Flowmeter shall provide calibrated outputs directly from the integral transmitter, throughout the operating range with the accuracy stated as follows:

Plus or minus 1.0% of rate from 2.0 to 20.0 ft/sec velocity (10:1 turndown).
Plus or minus 0.02 ft/sec below 2 ft / sec

Each flowmeter shall receive a wet calibration, within the expected operating range, against a primary volumetric standard that is traceable to NIST.
Local display shall provide instantaneous flow rate information and totalized flow information and shall be factory configured for connection to a specific flowmeter.
Approved Manufacturers:

Onicon (or approved equal)

PRESSURE INSTRUMENTS

Air Pressure Sensors:

Accuracy: 1% of full scale
Duct Mounted Sensors:

Provide duct mounted static pressure probe including minimum 3” duct insertion and pressure transmitter connected via pneumatic tubing.
Pressure transmitter shall be selected and calibrated for operations between 0 and 200% of the maximum normal operating pressure.

Space Pressure Sensors:

Provide two ceiling or wall mount static pressure pickups including filter and differential pressure transmitter connected via pneumatic tubing. Transmitter shall be located to minimize pneumatic tubing length.
Sensing range: -0.10 to +0.10” WC

Pressure Switches:

Shall provide electrical switching action upon a sensed pressure differential increase between two points. Sensitivity shall be suitable for the application. Set point shall be adjustable over the full range of the device. Switching action shall SPDT. Electrical switch rating shall be 10 amps at 120 VAC, minimum.
Pressure rating of switch and connecting tubing:

Fan - Rated for 12 inches WC.
Pump – Maximum deadhead system pressure.

Switches used for safety shutdown applications shall be of the manual reset type.

Liquid/Steam Pressure Sensors:

Accuracy: 1% of full scale
Each pressure sensor shall include a pressure pickup line(s) connected to a pressure transducer.
Pressure transducer shall be selected and calibrated for operations between 0 and 200% of the maximum normal operating differential pressure.
Span and zero shall be individually adjustable.


The transducer shall not be damaged by pressures up to 500 psig on either side of the transducer and all wetted parts shall be inert on the presence of up to a 40% concentration of ethylene or polypropylene glycol in water.
Provide isolation and drain valves for each side of the pressure chamber. Furnish and install mounting brackets appropriate for the installation location.
Liquid transducers shall be provided with a 5 valve manifold for isolation, calibration and air bleed.

Pressure Switches:

Shall provide electrical switching action upon a sensed pressure differential increase between two points. Sensitivity shall be suitable for the application. Set point shall be adjustable over the full range of the device. Switching action shall SPDT. Electrical switch rating shall be 10 amps at 120 VAC, minimum.
Pressure rating of switch and connecting tubing:

Fan - Rated for 12 inches WC.
Pump – Maximum deadhead system pressure.

Switches used for safety shutdown applications shall be of the manual reset type.

ELECTRICAL COMPONENTS AND ACCESSORIES

Components:

Control Relays:

Control relays shall be provided with two spare, unused contacts, one normally opened and the other normally closed.
All relays shall be plug-in interchangeable mounted on a circuit board and wired to numbered terminal strips.
Start/stop relay module shall provide either momentary or maintained switching action as appropriate for the motor being started.

Current Switches:

Current Sensing Switches (CS): CS shall be utilized for monitoring motor operation. Switch shall be adjustable so that a contact closure is made any time the motor is operating within a “normal” range (1.25-50 amps). Low motor amps resulting from low loading or belt failure shall indicate “OFF”. Induced current from the motor power feed shall power CS. The CS shall provide visual indication (LED’s) for output status and sensor power; shall have an adjustable trip set-point to ± 1% of its range from -15 to 60°C; shall be isolated to 600 VAC rms; shall be a self gripping split-core type with an optional drill mount bracket; output shall be N.O., solid state, 1.0 A at 30 VAC/DC with a minimum aperture of .52” x .68” for motor power feed. CS shall be a Hawkeye model #H-608 as supplied by Veris Industries, Inc. or equal.
Motor Status: The contractor shall provide and install a current sensing switch on any motor required to have motor status. The split-core current switch shall be clamped around one of the three phase motor conductors. The contractor shall adjust the switch per the manufacturer’s recommendations to provide status only when the motor driven device (fan, pump, etc.) is operating normally.

Wiring and Conduit:

Control wiring and cabling shall be per National Electrical Code (NEC) requirements and equipment manufacturer's recommendation and requirements of the mechanical control systems.


PNEUMATIC COMPONENTS AND ACCESSORIES

Tubing:

Copper tubing shall be new hard drawn, air grade, ASTM B75 for 3/8 inch and smaller or type L, ASTM B68 for 1/2 inch and larger, with solder joint or compression type fittings, at the option of the MSCC.
Plastic tubing (all sizes) shall be black virgin, polyethylene, ASTM D1248, Type 1, Class C, Grade 5, meeting crack test performance required by ASTM D1693 and be fire retardant (FR) rated. Multi- tube harness material shall be as specified above with a polyester film barrier and vinyl jacket not less than 0.062 inches thick. All non-metallic tubing shall be 1/4" O.D. minimum; micro-sleeve is not acceptable.

Differential Pressure Gauges:

Description:

2000 Series magnahelic differential pressure gauges shall provide an accurate indication of positive, negative, or differential air pressure. The gauge shall include a 4” (10.2 cm) easy to read dial and frictionless magnetic movement in cast aluminum housing and be resistant to shock, vibration, and overpressure. The 2000 Series has both back and side connections so that it may be either surface or flush mounted. Ranges are available from 0” to 0.25” W.C. up to 10” W.C. Select gauge for normal reading to be not less than 25% of full scale.

Features:

2% full scale accuracy
Easy to read 4” (10.16 cm) white dial and red tipped pointer
Flush or surface mounting
Easily accessible zero adjustment
Corrosion resistant cast aluminum housing
Back and side connections

Specifications:

Accuracy: ± 2% of FS (3% on -0 and 4% on -00 ranges) throughout range @ 70 °F (21 °C).
Overpressure: Relief plug designed to open at 25 psig (172 kPa).
Ambient Temperature: 20 °F to 140 °F (-7 °C to 60 °C).
Rated Total Pressure: -20” Hg to 15 psig (103 kPa).
Connections: 1/8” NPT female high and low pressure taps, duplicated-one pair side and one pair back.
Housing: Die-cast aluminum, case and aluminum parts iridate-dipped to withstand 168 hour salt spray test, baked dark gray hammerloid exterior finish.
Standard Accessories: Two 1/8” NPT plugs for duplicate pressure taps, two 1/8” pipe thread to rubber tubing adapters, and three flush mounting adapters with screws.
Weight: 1.0 lb. (2.0 oz).
Warranty: 1 year.

Pneumatic/Electric Relays:

Electric, two position type, range and element shall be suitable for the service. Single or two pole, normally open or normally closed as required. Pneumatic signal setpoint shall be adjustable over the full range. Switch rating shall be 15 amps at 120 VAC.


Electric/Pneumatic Relays:

Electric, two position type, range and element shall be suitable for the service. Shall be suitable for field or panel mounting, have a 120 VAC coil, and 3 or 4 ports as applicable.

Electric/Pneumatic Transducers:

Transducers shall convert electronic signals from the DDC controller to linear proportional pneumatic signals for all DDC controlled modulating pneumatic devices.
Shall be a panel-mounted device with hand/auto switch, override dial for manual override control, and an output pressure gauge.
Shall be selected with a pneumatic output signal range to match the pneumatic actuators served.
Output accuracy shall be 1/4 psig at 75°F.
Shall be high capacity non-bleed devices with a minimum output capacity as necessary for the application, except special circumstances that require a constant bleed controller with branch exhaust on signal loss.

PART 3 - EXECUTION

EXAMINATION

Label every single control device and component including, but not limited to, space sensors, well sensors, AFS’s, control panels, damper actuators, VAV box controllers, valves, outdoor air sensors, relays, pressure sensors, differential pressure transmitters, pressure switches, etc. Label must include plain English descriptor and BAS point ID that matches the ID on the OWS exactly.

Verify that conditioned power supply is available to control units and operator workstation.

Verify that duct-, pipe-, and equipment-mounted devices and wiring and pneumatic piping are installed before proceeding with installation.

COMMISSIONING

This contractor shall make available a qualified technician that is familiar with the installation of this job for technical assistance to the commissioning engineer. No additional paperwork or reports will be required by this process. Where multiple operations in multiple locations are required to test equipment affected under this contract, the appropriate number of staff shall be required.

INSTALLATION

Install equipment level and plumb.

Install software in control units and OIS. Implement all features of programs to specified requirements and as appropriate to sequence of operation.

Connect and configure equipment and software to achieve the sequence of operation specified.

Verify location of thermostats, humidistats, and other exposed control sensors with plans and room details before installation. Locate all 48 inches above the floor.

Install averaging elements in ducts and plenums in crossing or zigzag pattern.


Install guards on thermostats in the following locations:

Entrances
Public areas
Where indicated

ELECTRICAL WIRING AND CONNECTION INSTALLATION

Control wiring in exposed areas and within walls shall be in conduit or EMT as specified in the Electrical Requirements - Division 26.

Low voltage control wiring in plenum areas and ceiling cavities shall be plenum rated cable installed parallel or perpendicular to the building structure. Install control wire in bridle rings every 10’ and change in direction. Label control wire as such at each bridle ring. This item will be strictly enforced.

Space sensor wires that cannot be run within a wall cavity shall be run in one-piece steel surface raceway (Wiremold V500 or equal) and painted to match the existing finish. Fill and patch any cavities left by previous sensors. Paint to match existing finish.

CONNECTIONS

Piping installation requirements are specified in other Division 23 Sections. Drawings indicate general arrangement of piping, fittings, and specialties.

Install piping adjacent to machine to allow service and maintenance.

Ground equipment.

Tighten electrical connectors and terminals according to manufacturer's published torque-tightening values. If manufacturer's torque values are not indicated, use those specified in UL 486A and UL 486B.

SENSORS, RELAYS, CONTROLS AND ASSOCIATED COMPONENTS

Location – Accessibility:

Locate controls, relays, instruments, switches, valves, devices and accessories so they are readily accessible for adjustment, service and replacement or as indicated. Conceal tubing, sensing lines, cables and capillaries in all areas except equipment rooms and other unfinished spaces. Install and route tubing, sensing lines, cables, capillaries and conduits parallel and perpendicular to building steel in parallel banks with changes of direction made at 90 degree angles.

Location – Sensing Air:

Locate, size, and support temperature sensing elements in air streams to properly sense the representative temperature. In the case of controlling, transmitting and indicating elements, the sensing device shall be located, sized and of the type to sense the average condition. In case of safety elements, the sensing device shall be located and of the type to sense the extreme condition.
Sensing elements in double wall casings and insulated ducts shall have the entire active portion within the air stream.

Insulation:

Where insulation is penetrated due to the installation of sensing elements or tubing, reseal the openings air and vapor tight. Where control devices are to be located on insulated surfaces, provide brackets to clear the finished surface of the insulation avoiding punctures of the vapor seal.


VIBRATION ISOLATION

Components:

Provide vibration isolation for controllers and components, either by location or by mounting devices.

Conduit and Tubing:

Install tubing and conduit to preclude nullification of provisions for vibration isolation of equipment and ducting. Mount single tube runs in aircraft type clamps containing an elastomer insert. Mounting shall prevent contact with ducting and air handling unit housing, casing or enclosure. Multiple runs shall conform to the same isolation requirements but details of mounting shall be submitted for approval. Provide looped rubber hose connection when tubing crosses flexible duct and equipment connectors.

FASTENING TO BUILDING STRUCTURES

The methods of attaching or fastening equipment or equipment supports or hangers to the building structure shall be subject to approval by the AE. Submit shop drawings or samples for approval before proceeding with the work.

Drilling, welding or the use of explosive driven fasteners on building structures shall require written prior approval by the AE for each type of application except where indicated.

Equipment shall not be attached to or supported from the roof deck, from removable or knockout panels, or temporary walls or partitions.

Electrical equipment mounted against exterior masonry walls shall be mounted at least 1 inch away from the wall surface.

FIELD QUALITY CONTROL

After the inspection has been completed, check systems for continuity.

After completion of system installation, the Contractor shall test, adjust, and readjust as necessary, all control equipment in terms of design, function, systems balance, performance, and otherwise make ready for air handling systems acceptance tests.

After systems acceptance and after the systems have operated in normal service for two weeks, check the adjustment on instruments and devices and correct items found to be out of order. When systems are in specified operating condition, and other pertinent specifications have been complied with, temperature control systems will be accepted for heating, ventilating and air conditioning systems. Readjustments necessary to accomplish the specified results shall be made during the warranty period upon request.

Coordinate with system manufacturer's representative the time of the final system check.

Provide equipment to check the calibration of instruments. Instruments not in calibration shall be recalibrated to function as required, or shall be replaced.

Calibrate and adjust control devices, linkages, accessories, and components for stable and accurate operation to meet the design intent and to obtain optimum performance from the equipment controlled. Final adjustment, calibration and checking shall be performed while the respective controlled systems are in full operation. Cause every device to automatically function as intended to ensure its proper operation.

After calibrations, adjustments, and checking have been completed and systems are operational, demonstrate to the administrative authorities having jurisdiction and to the AE the complete and correct functioning of all control systems and equipment. These demonstrations shall consist of operating the


controls through their normal full ranges and sequences. Simulate abnormal conditions to demonstrate proper functioning of safety devices. Readjust settings to their correct design values, and after sufficient time, observe ability of controls to establish the desired conditions, noting abnormal deviations. Make necessary repairs, replacements or adjustments on items which fail to perform satisfactorily and repeat tests to demonstrate compliance with the design intent.

DEMONSTRATION

Engage a factory-authorized service representative to train Owner's maintenance personnel to adjust, operate, and maintain control systems and components.

Train Owner's maintenance personnel on procedures and schedules for starting and stopping, troubleshooting, servicing, and maintaining equipment and schedules.
Provide operator training on data display, alarm and status descriptors, requesting data, executing commands, calibrating and adjusting devices, resetting default values, and requesting logs.
Review data in maintenance manuals.
Schedule training with Owner, through Architect, with at least seven days' advance notice.

ON-SITE ASSISTANCE

Occupancy Adjustments: Within one year of date of Substantial Completion, provide up to three Project site visits, when requested by Owner, to adjust and calibrate components and to assist Owner's personnel in making program changes and in adjusting sensors and controls to suit actual conditions.

OWNER’S INSTRUCTION

The MSCC shall Provide a training program encompassing equipment and systems for client's operating and maintenance personnel. Coordinate training schedule with the Owner.

Training staff shall include Contractor's personnel supplemented by equipment manufacturer's engineering representative.

Utilize corrected equipment and system shop drawings, manuals, demonstration apparatus and installed, functioning equipment.

During system commissioning and when acceptable performance of the system hardware and software has been established, provide on-site operator and maintenance personnel instruction. Instruction shall be by acceptable competent Contractor Representatives familiar with the systems and computer software, hardware, and accessories.

Provide 8 hours of "classroom" instruction to the client's personnel on the operation of DDC System equipment. Operator instruction shall include the overall operational program, equipment functions (both individually and as part of the total integrated system), commands, advisories, and appropriate operator intervention required in responding to the systems operation. Use the operating and maintenance manuals described above as texts during the instructional period. Instruction shall also include description of the chronological information flow from field sensors, contacts and devices to the DDC System. The overview of the system's communication network shall be to provide an understanding to the client's personnel of the interplay between initiating devices, data gathering locations, loop communications and their importance within the DDC System.


END OF SECTION 23 0900


SECTION 23 2116 – HYDRONIC PIPING SPECIALTIES

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, Standard General and Supplementary General Conditions, Division 1 Specification Sections.

SCOPE OF WORK

Provide hydronic specialties for the following systems:

Chilled Water System

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

AUTOMATIC AND MANUAL AIR VENTS

Manual air vents shall be ¾" ball valve per Section 20 0523.

Automatic air vents shall be non-ferrous, rated for 150 psig maximum operating pressure.

Manufacturers:

For pipe sizes 2" and less.

Bell & Gosset model 87
Armstrong model 75
Taco Hy-Vent

For pipe sizes 2 ½" and larger.

Hoffman model 78
Armstrong model 75

SUCTION DIFFUSERS

Provide angle pattern suction diffusers rated at 175 psig, 250 F., having cast iron or ductile iron body, with flanged (grooved piping if grooved piping is specified for system) connections. Provide a stainless steel combination diffuser-strainer cylinder with 3/16" or 1/8" diameter perforations, stainless steel flow straightening inlet vanes, a 16 mesh bronze start-up strainer, a permanent magnet and an adjustable support foot.

Manufacturers:

Bell & Gossett
Armstrong
Wheatley
Taco
Grinnell
Victualic


TRIPLE DUTY VALVE

Provide a straight or angle pattern combination bubble tight shut-off, calibrated balancing and non-slam check valve rated at 175 psig working pressure and 250 degrees F. Body shall be cast iron or ductile iron, with flanged or grooved piping connections.

Valve shall have a bronze seat, replaceable bronze disc with EDPM seat insert, stainless steel stem and spring. Provide brass readout valves with integral check valves to measure differential pressure readings across the orifice.

Valve design shall permit re-packing under full system pressure.

Manufacturers:

Bell & Gossett model 3D or 3DS
Armstrong
Wheatley
Taco

WATER PRESSURE REGULATING/REDUCING VALVE

Bronze valve body, renewable stainless steel seat. Adjustable reduced pressure range, built-in bypass, diaphragm type with spring cage and orifice. Pressure to be adjustable from a top screw on the valve.

Manufacturers:

Watts model 223BHP
Bell & Gossett
Hoffman

WATER PRESSURE RELIEF VALVE

ASME rated, sized for the full installed capacity of the low pressure side of the regulating station. Factory set valve at not more than 20% above low side pressure. Furnish seat material suited for the service.

Manufacturers:

Consolidated
ITT Bell & Gossett
ITT McDonnell Miller
Watts

COALESCING SEPARATOR

Provide coalescing type air/dirt or dirt separator, type and sized to match main system piping or as indicated on the drawings. Air/dirt separator shall include separate air chamber for air removal and a lower vessel extension for dirt separation.

Separator shall be welded carbon steel fabricated with ANSI B16.5 flange connections and rated for 150 psig design pressure and 250F design temperature. Separator shall include an internal assembly of rigidly constructed vertical tubes of stainless steel or copper wire matrix designed to coalesce microbubbles out of solution and form larger air bubbles that rise to the top of the vessel and to separate dirt particles that collect at the bottom.

Separators shall include manufacturer’s integral high capacity air vent or cast iron air vent as specified in Section 2.1, flanged lower head to allow coalescing media removal, side tap valve to facilitate system filling and bottom drain connection with ball valve for draining.


Separators shall be capable of removing 100% of the free air, 100% of the entrained air, and up to 99.6% of the dissolved air in the system fluid. Dirt separation shall be at least 80% of all particles 30 micron and larger within 100 passes.

Approved Manufacturers:

Spirotherm
Thrush Aar-O-Vent
Bell & Gossett

EXPANSION TANKS

Provide expansion tank, constructed of welded steel with butyl rubber bladder, replaceable and full acceptance volume, ASME stamped for 125 psig at 240F. Tank shall have capacity, size and operating pressures as shown on drawings.

Manufacturer:

Bell & Gossett
Wessels
Amtrol
Armstrong
Taco

PART 3 - EXECUTION

INSTALLATION OF AUTOMATIC & MANUAL AIR VENTS

Install automatic air vents at high points (where pipe drops in direction of flow) in hydronic systems. Isolate the auto air vent with an isolation valve.

Where manual air vents are indicated, they shall consist of an isolation valve terminated with an elbow, threaded hose connection, and hose cap.

INSTALLATION OF SUCTION DIFFUSERS

Install to allow complete removal of strainer elements. Remove 16 mesh bronze start-up mesh after system start-up and flushing is complete. Replace with standard operating strainer. Adjust support foot to carry weight of suction piping (to inertia pad where applicable).

INSTALLATION OF EXPANSION TANK

See drawings for locations, support and piping details. Document initial and operating pressures, and temperature, and submit report for approval.


END OF SECTION 23 2116


SECTION 23 2123 - HYDRONIC PUMPS

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

Section Includes pumps for hydronic water systems.

SUBMITTALS

Product Data: Include certified performance curves and rated capacities, operating characteristics, furnished specialties, final impeller dimensions, materials of construction, and accessories for each type of product indicated. Indicate pump's operating point on curves.

Shop Drawings: Provide for each pump.

Show pump layout and connections.
Include setting drawings with templates for installing foundation and anchor bolts and other anchorages. Include shipping and operating weights.
Include diagrams for power, signal, and control wiring.
Include motor manufacturer and motor data
Include vibration isolation and inertia bases coordinated with the pump dimensions

Maintenance Data: Provide for each pump, including maintenance manuals specified in Division 1.

QUALITY ASSURANCE

UL Compliance: Fabricate and label pumps to comply with UL 778, "Motor-Operated Water Pumps," for construction requirements.

Product Options: Drawings indicate size, profiles, connections, and dimensional requirements of pumps and are based on the specific types and models indicated. Other manufacturers' pumps with equal performance characteristics may be considered. Refer to Division 1 Section "Substitutions."

Regulatory Requirements: Fabricate and test steam condensate pumps to comply with HI 1.1-1.5, "Centrifugal Pumps for Nomenclature, Definitions, Application and Operation," and HI 1.6, "Centrifugal Pump Tests."

Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, Article 100, by a testing agency acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction.

DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING

Manufacturer's Preparation for Shipping: Clean flanges and exposed machined metal surfaces and treat with anticorrosion compound after assembly and testing. Protect flanges, pipe openings, and nozzles with wooden flange covers or with screwed-in plugs.

Store pumps in dry location.

Retain protective covers for flanges and protective coatings during storage.


Protect bearings and couplings against damage from sand, grit, and other foreign matter.

Comply with pump manufacturer's written rigging instructions.

COORDINATION

Coordinate size and location of concrete bases.	Cast anchor-bolt inserts into bases.	Concrete, reinforcement, and formwork requirements are specified in Division 03 Section "Cast-in-Place Concrete."

WARRANTY

Provide a complete parts and labor warranty for a minimum of one year from the date of Substantial Completion.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

2.1

GENERAL PUMP REQUIREMENTS

A.
Pump Units: Factory assembled and tested.

B.
Motors: Include built-in, thermal-overload protection and grease-lubricated ball bearings. Select each motor to be non-overloading over full range of pump performance curve.

C.
Motors Indicated to Be Energy Efficient: Minimum efficiency as indicated according to IEEE 112, Test Method B. Include motors with higher efficiency than "average standard industry motors" according to IEEE 112, Test Method B, if efficiency is not indicated.

D.
Variable Speed Drive Applications: Provide shaft grounding ring.
2.2

FLOOR-MOUNTED, END-SUCTION, FLEXIBLY - COUPLED PUMPS

A.
Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:


Armstrong
Bell & Gossett
Taco

B.
Single stage, end suction centrifugal, bronze fitted, base mounted pump, flexibly-coupled.

C.
Vertical split case back pull-out design to allow pump bearings and seals to be serviced without disturbing piping connections or electric motor connections.

D.
Wear Rings (if provided as standard): Replaceable, bronze.

E.
Mechanical seals with ceramic seat and carbon seal ring. Oil or grease lubricated, bronze sleeve bearings.

F.
Base: Pump and motor shall be mounted on a single, rigid, groutable, welded, structural steel frame.

PART 3 - EXECUTION

EXAMINATION

Examine equipment foundations and anchor-bolt locations for compliance with requirements for installation.

Examine roughing-in for piping systems to verify actual locations of piping connections before pump installation.


Examine foundations and inertia bases for suitable conditions where pumps are to be installed.

Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected.

PUMP INSTALLATION

Install pumps according to manufacturer's written instructions.

Install pumps according to HI 1.1-1.5, "Centrifugal Pumps for Nomenclature, Definitions, Application and Operation."

Install pumps to provide access for periodic maintenance, including removing motors, impellers, couplings, and accessories.

Support pumps and piping separately so piping is not supported by pumps.

Suspend in-line pumps using continuous-thread hanger rod and vibration-isolation hangers. Install seismic bracing as required by authorities having jurisdiction.

Set base-mounted pumps on concrete foundation. Disconnect coupling halves before setting. Do not reconnect couplings until alignment operations have been completed.

Support pump baseplate on rectangular metal blocks and shims, or on metal wedges with small taper, at points near foundation bolts to provide a gap of 3/4 to 1-1/2 inches between pump base and foundation for grouting.
Adjust metal supports or wedges until pump and driver shafts are level. Check coupling faces and suction and discharge flanges of pump to verify that they are level and plumb.

ALIGNMENT

Align pump and motor shafts and piping connections after setting them on foundations, after grout has been set and foundation bolts have been tightened, and after piping connections have been made.

Comply with pump and coupling manufacturers' written instructions.

Adjust pump and motor shafts for angular and offset alignment by methods specified in HI 1.1-1.5, "Centrifugal Pumps for Nomenclature, Definitions, Application and Operation."

After alignment is correct, tighten foundation bolts evenly but not too firmly. Completely fill baseplate with non-shrink, nonmetallic grout while metal blocks and shims or wedges are in place. After grout has cured, fully tighten foundation bolts.

CONNECTIONS

Piping installation requirements are specified in other Division 20 & 23 Sections. Drawings indicate general arrangement of piping, fittings, and specialties.

Install piping adjacent to equipment to allow service and maintenance.

Connect piping to pumps. Install valves that are the same size as piping connected to pumps.

Install suction and discharge pipe sizes equal to or greater than diameter of pump nozzles.

Install check valve and throttling valve on discharge side of in-line circulators.

Install suction diffuser and shutoff valve on suction side of base-mounted pumps.


Install triple-duty valve on discharge side of base-mounted pumps.

Install flexible connectors on suction and discharge sides of base-mounted pumps between pump casing and valves.

Install pressure gages on pump suction and discharge. Install at integral pressure-gage tappings where provided.

Install temperature and pressure-gage connector plugs in suction and discharge piping around each pump.

Install electrical connections for power, controls, and devices.

Electrical power and control wiring and connections are specified in Division 26 Sections.

Ground equipment.

Tighten electrical connectors and terminals according to manufacturer's published torque-tightening values. If manufacturer's torque values are not indicated, use those specified in UL 486A and UL 486B.

START-UP PROCEDURES

Verify that pumps are installed and connected according to the Contract Documents.

Verify that electrical wiring installation complies with manufacturer's written instructions and the Contract Documents.

Engage a factory-authorized service representative to perform startup service:

Lubricate bearings.
Remove grease-lubricated bearing covers, flush bearings with kerosene, and clean thoroughly. Fill with new lubricant according to manufacturer's written instructions.
Disconnect coupling and check motor for proper rotation that matches direction marked on pump casing.
Verify that pumps are free to rotate by hand and that pumps for handling hot liquids are free to rotate with pumps hot and cold. Do not operate pumps if they are bound or drag, until cause of trouble is determined and corrected.
Check suction piping connections for tightness to avoid drawing air into pumps.
Clean strainers.
Verify that pump controls are correct for required application.
Prime pumps by opening suction valves and closing drains, and prepare pumps for operation.
Open circulating line valves if pumps should not be operated against dead shutoff.
Start motors.
Open discharge valves slowly.
Check general mechanical operation of pumps and motors.
Close circulating line valves once there is sufficient flow through pumps to prevent overheating.

When pumps are to be started against closed check valves with discharge shutoff valves open, steps are the same, except open discharge valves before starting motors.

Refer to Division 23 Section "Testing, Adjusting and Balancing" for detailed requirements for testing, adjusting, and balancing hydronic systems.

COMMISSIONING

Perform the commissioning activities as outlined in the Division 01 Section Commissioning and other requirements of the Contract Documents.


DEMONSTRATION

Engage a factory-authorized service representative to train Owner's maintenance personnel to adjust, operate, and maintain hydronic pumps as specified below:

Train Owner's maintenance personnel on procedures and schedules for starting and stopping, troubleshooting, servicing, and maintaining pumps.
Review data in maintenance manuals. Refer to Division 01 Section "Closeout Procedures."
Review data in maintenance manuals. Refer to Division 01 Section "Operation and Maintenance Data."
Schedule training with Owner, through Architect, with at least seven days' advance notice.


END OF SECTION 23 2123


SECTION 23 2500 - HVAC WATER TREATMENT

PART 1 - GENERAL

1.1

RELATED DOCUMENTS

A.
Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 1 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.
1.2

SUMMARY

A.
This Section includes water-treatment systems for the following:


Chilled-water piping (closed-loop system)
Chemicals

B.
Provide water treatment products and services including:


Chemicals for cleaning, passivation, and treatment of each system.
On-going treatment, chemicals, testing, certification, and reports to demonstrate effective water treatment is maintained at all times.
Start-up and operation of chemical treatment equipment.

C.
Provide a complete chemical water treatment program during construction for all new and reused piping networks. This program shall begin from the point each system is filled during construction and extend until Substantial Completion or final Owner acceptance of each system, whichever occurs later. The program shall include water analysis, chemicals, testing, equipment, consulting and service for all systems.
1.3

DEFINITIONS

A.
EEPROM: Electrically erasable, programmable read-only memory.

B.
PPM: Parts per million.

C.
TDS: Total dissolved solids consist of salts and other materials that combine with water as a solution.

D.
TSS: Total suspended solids include both organic and inorganic solids that are suspended in the water. These solids may include silt, plankton, and industrial wastes.
1.4

SUBMITTALS

A.
Product Data: Include rated capacities; water-pressure drops; shipping, installed, and operating weights; and furnished products listed below:


Pumps
Chemical solution tanks
Agitators
Control equipment and devices
Test equipment
Chemicals
Filters
Chemical feeders


Shop Drawings: Detail equipment assemblies indicating dimensions, weights, loads, required clearances, method of field assembly, components, and location and size of each field connection.

Wiring Diagrams: Detail power and control wiring and differentiate between manufacturer-installed and field-installed wiring.

Water Analysis: Submit a copy of the water analysis to illustrate water quality available at Project site.

Field Test Reports: Indicate and interpret test results for compliance with performance requirements.

Maintenance Data: For pumps, agitators, filters, system controls, and accessories to include in maintenance manuals specified in Division 1.

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Installer Qualifications: An experienced installer who is an authorized representative of the chemical treatment manufacturer for both installation and maintenance of chemical treatment equipment required for this Project.

Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, Article 100, by a testing agency acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction, and marked for intended use.

MAINTENANCE

Scope of Service: Provide chemicals and service program for maintaining optimum conditions in the circulating water for inhibiting corrosion, scale, and organic growths in the cooling, chilled-water piping and equipment. Services and chemicals shall be provided for a period of one year from date of Substantial Completion, for all systems.

EXTRA MATERIALS

Furnish extra materials described below that match products installed and that are packaged with protective covering for storage and identified with labels describing contents.

Chemicals: Furnish quantity equal to 50 percent of amount initially installed.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

CHEMICAL FEED SYSTEM DESCRIPTION

Closed-Loop System: One bypass feeder on each system with isolating and drain valves downstream from circulating pumps, unless otherwise indicated.

Introduce chemical treatment through bypass feeder when required or indicated by test.

PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS

Maintain water quality for HVAC systems that controls corrosion and build-up of scale and biological growth for maximum efficiency of installed equipment without posing a hazard to operating personnel or the environment.


Base chemical treatment performance requirements on quality of water available at Project site, HVAC system equipment material characteristics and functional performance characteristics, operating personnel capabilities, and requirements and guidelines of authorities having jurisdiction. If equipment manufacturer requires tighter control, adjust treatment to meet more stringent requirements.

Closed System: Maintain system essentially free of scale, corrosion, and fouling to sustain the following water characteristics:

pH: Maintain a value within 8.5 - 10.5.
Alkalinity: Maintain a value within 100-500 mg/L as CaCO(3).
Steel Corrosion Inhibiters: Provide sufficient inhibitors to limit mild steel corrosion to 0.5 mils per year.
Yellow Metal Corrosion Inhibitor: Provide sufficient copper and brass corrosion inhibitors to limit copper corrosion to 0.1 mils per year.
Scale Control: Provide softened water for initial fill and makeup. here softened water is not used, provide sufficient scale inhibitors to prevent formation of scale and maintain all scale- forming material in solution.
Dispersants: Provide sufficient dispersants to prevent sedimentation of fine particulate matter.
Microbiological Limits:

Total Aerobic Plate Count: Maintain a maximum value of 1,000 organisms/mL.
Total Anaerobic Plate Count: Maintain a maximum value of 100 organisms/mL.
Nitrate Reducers: Maintain a maximum value of 100 organisms/mL.
Sulfate Reducers: Maintain a maximum value of 0 organisms/mL.
Iron Bacteria: Maintain a maximum value of 0 organisms/mL.

MANUFACTURERS

Available Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, manufacturers offering products that may be incorporated into the Work include, but are not limited to, the following:


Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

HVAC Water-Treatment Products:

Barclay Chemical Company, Water Management, Inc.
Calgon Corporation, ECC International
DuBois Chemicals, Inc.; DuBois USA Subsidiary
Harmsco Industrial Filters
HOH Water Technology
Nalco Chemical Company
Stewart-Hall, Division of the Rectorseal Corporation
Suez Water, USA

CHEMICAL FEEDING EQUIPMENT

Bypass Feeders: Cast iron or steel, for introducing chemicals into system; with funnel shutoff valve on top, air-release valve on top, drain valve on bottom, and recirculating shutoff valves on sides.

Capacity: 1.8 gallons
Working Pressure: 175 psig

Drip Feeders: Plastic reservoir with capillary tubing probe, weight, charging syringe, and clip.


Solenoid Valves: Forged-brass body, globe pattern, and general-purpose solenoid enclosure with 120-V, continuous-duty coil.

Electronic Timers: 150-second and 5-minute ranges, with infinite adjustment over full range, and mounted in cabinet with hand-off-auto switches and status lights.

Chemical Tubing: Schedule 40, PVC with solvent-cement joints; or polypropylene tubing with heat fusion.

Plastic Ball Valves: Rigid PVC or CPVC body, integral union ends, and polytetrafluoroethylene seats and seals.

Plastic-Body Strainer: Rigid PVC or CPVC with cleanable stainless-steel strainer element.

CHEMICAL TREATMENT TEST EQUIPMENT

Test Kit: Manufacturer recommended equipment and chemicals, in a carrying case, for testing pH, total dissolved solids, dissolved oxygen, biocount, chloride, and total alkalinity and for calcium hardness field tests.

Corrosion Test Coupon Assembly: Constructed of corrosion material, complete with piping, valves, and mild steel and copper coupons. Locate copper coupon downstream from mild steel coupon in the test coupon assembly.

Two-station rack for closed-loop systems.
Four-station rack for open condenser water systems.

CHEMICALS

Furnish chemicals recommended by water-treatment system manufacturer that are compatible with piping system components and connected equipment.

System Cleaner: Liquid alkaline compound with emulsifying agents and detergents to remove grease and petroleum products.

Quantity: As determined by chemical treatment supplier.

Biocide: Chlorine release agents or microbiocides.

Quantity: As determined by chemical treatment supplier.

Closed-Loop, Water Piping Chemicals: Sequestering agent to reduce deposits and adjust pH, corrosion inhibitors, and conductivity enhancers.

Quantity: As determined by chemical treatment supplier.

CHILLED-WATER FILTRATION UNIT

Filtration Unit: Stainless-steel housing and polypropylene filter with polypropylene core.

Replaceable Filter Media: Compatible with antifreeze and water-treatment chemicals.

Filter Media for Sediment Removal Service: Rated at 98 percent efficiency for 20-micrometer particulate.

Pressure Drop through the Filter Cartridge: Not to exceed 2 psig at design-flow rate when clean, and 6 psig when filter is dirty.


STAINLESS STEEL PIPES AND FITTINGS

Stainless Steel Tubing: Comply with ASTM A269/A269M, Type 316.

Stainless Steel Fittings: Comply with ASTM A815/A815M, Type 316, Grade WP-S.

Two-Piece, Full-Port, Stainless Steel Ball Valves: ASTM A351/A351M, Type 316 stainless steel body; ASTM A276/A276M, Type 316 stainless steel stem and vented ball, carbon-filled TFE seats, threaded body design with adjustable stem packing, threaded ends, and 250-psig steam working pressure and 600- psig cold working pressure ratings.

Three-Piece, Full-Port, Stainless Steel Ball Valves: ASTM A351/A351M, Type 316 stainless steel body; ASTM A276/A276M, Type 316 stainless steel stem and vented ball, threaded body design with adjustable stem packing, threaded ends, and 150-psig steam working pressure and 600-psig cold working pressure rating.

PART 3 - EXECUTION

WATER ANALYSIS

Perform an analysis of supply water to determine the type and quantities of chemical treatment needed to maintain the water quality as specified in "Performance Requirements" Article.

INSTALLATION

Install treatment equipment level and plumb.

Add cleaning chemicals as recommended by manufacturer.

Install water-testing equipment on wall near water-chemical-application equipment.

Install interconnecting control wiring for chemical-treatment controls and sensors.

Mount sensors and injectors in piping circuits.

Install water meter in makeup-water supply.

Bypass Feeders: Install in closed hydronic systems, including chilled water and equip with the following:

Install bypass feeder in a bypass circuit around circulating pumps unless otherwise indicated on Drawings.
Install test-coupon assembly in bypass circuit around circulating pumps unless otherwise indicated on Drawings.
Install a gate or full-port ball isolation valves on inlet, outlet, and drain below feeder inlet.
Install a swing check on inlet after the isolation valve.

CONNECTIONS

Piping installation requirements are specified in other Division 15 Sections. Drawings indicate general arrangement of piping, fittings, and specialties.

Install piping adjacent to equipment to allow service and maintenance.

Confirm applicable electrical requirements in Division 16 Sections for connecting electrical equipment.


Ground equipment.

Tighten electrical connectors and terminals according to manufacturer's published torque-tightening values. If manufacturer's torque values are not indicated, use those specified in UL 486A and UL 486B.

ELECTRICAL CONNECTIONS

Confirm applicable electrical requirements in electrical Sections for connecting electrical equipment.

Ground equipment in accordance with Section 26 0526 "Grounding and Bonding for Electrical Systems."

Connect wiring in accordance with Section 26 0519 "Low-Voltage Electrical Power Conductors and Cables."

FIELD QUALITY CONTROL

Engage a factory-authorized service representative to perform startup service.

Inspect field-assembled components and equipment installation, including piping and electrical connections. Report results in writing.
Inspect piping and equipment to determine that systems and equipment have been cleaned, flushed, and filled with water, and are fully operational before introducing chemicals for water- treatment system.
Place HVAC water-treatment system into operation and calibrate controls during the preliminary phase of HVAC systems' startup procedures.

Test chemical feed piping as follows:

Do not enclose, cover, or put piping into operation until it is tested and satisfactory test results are achieved.
Test for leaks and defects. If testing is performed in segments, submit separate report for each test, complete with diagram of portion of piping tested.
Leave uncovered and unconcealed new, altered, extended, and replaced water piping until it has been tested and approved. Expose work that has been covered or concealed before it has been tested and approved.
Cap and subject piping to static water pressure of 50 psig above operating pressure, without exceeding pressure rating of piping system materials. Isolate test source and allow test pressure to stand for four hours. Leaks and loss in test pressure constitute defects.
Repair leaks and defects with new materials and retest piping until satisfactory results are obtained.
Prepare test reports, including required corrective action.

ADJUSTING

Sample boiler water at one-week intervals after boiler startup for a period of five weeks, and prepare certified test report for each required water performance characteristic. Where applicable, comply with ASTM D 3370 and the following standards:

Silica: ASTM D 859.
Steam System: ASTM D 1066.
Acidity and Alkalinity: ASTM D 1067.
Iron: ASTM D 1068.
Water Hardness: ASTM D 1126.


Occupancy Adjustments: Within 12 months of Substantial Completion, perform two separate water analyses on each system to prove that automatic chemical feed systems are maintaining water quality within performance requirements specified in this Section. Perform analyses at least 60 days apart. Submit written reports of water analysis.

DEMONSTRATION

Engage a factory-authorized service representative to train Owner's maintenance personnel to adjust, operate, and maintain HVAC water-treatment systems and equipment.

Train Owner's maintenance personnel on procedures and schedules for starting and stopping, troubleshooting, servicing, and maintaining equipment and schedules.

Review manufacturer's safety data sheets for handling of chemicals.

Review data in maintenance manuals, especially data on recommended parts inventory and supply sources and on availability of parts and service. Refer to Division 1 Section "Contract Closeout."

Review data in maintenance manuals, especially data on recommended parts inventory and supply sources and on availability of parts and service. Refer to Division 1 Section "Operation and Maintenance Data."

Schedule at least four hours of training with Owner, through Architect, with at least seven days' advance notice.


END OF SECTION 23 2500


SECTION 23 6426 – ROTARY-SCREW WATER CHILLERS

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

Section Includes:

Packaged, air-cooled chillers.

DEFINITIONS

BAS: Building automation system.

COP: Coefficient of performance. The ratio of the rate of heat removal to the rate of energy input using consistent units for any given set of rating conditions.

EER: Energy-efficiency ratio. The ratio of the cooling capacity given in terms of Btu/h to the total power input given in terms of watts at any given set of rating conditions.

IPLV: Integrated part-load value. A single-number part-load efficiency figure of merit calculated per the method defined by ARI 550/590 and referenced to ARI standard rating conditions.

kW/Ton (kW/kW): The ratio of total power input of the chiller in kilowatts to the net refrigerating capacity in tons (kW) at any given set of rating conditions.

NPLV: Nonstandard part-load value. A single-number part-load efficiency figure of merit calculated per the method defined by ARI 550/590 and intended for operating conditions other than ARI standard rating conditions.

PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS

Site Altitude: Chiller shall be suitable for altitude in which installed without affecting performance indicated. Make adjustments to affected chiller components to account for site altitude.

ACTION SUBMITTALS

Product Data: For each type of product indicated. Include refrigerant, rated capacities, operating characteristics, furnished specialties, and accessories.

Performance at AHRI standard conditions and at conditions indicated.
Performance at AHRI standard unloading conditions.
Minimum evaporator flow rate.
Refrigerant capacity of chiller.
Oil capacity of chiller.
Fluid capacity of evaporator.
Characteristics of safety relief valves.
Minimum entering condenser-air temperature.
Maximum entering condenser-air temperature.




10.  Performance at varying capacities with constant-design entering condenser-air temperature. Repeat performance at varying capacities for different entering condenser-air temperatures from design to minimum in 10 deg F (6 deg C) increments.
B.
Shop Drawings: Include plans, elevations, sections, details, and attachments to other work.

Detail equipment assemblies and indicate dimensions, weights, load distribution, required clearances, method of field assembly, components, and location and size of each field connection.
Wiring Diagrams: For power, signal, and control wiring.
1.6

INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS

A.
Coordination Drawings: Floor plans, drawn to scale, on which the following items are shown and coordinated with each other, using input from Installers of the item involved:


Structural supports.
Piping roughing-in requirements.
Wiring roughing-in requirements, including spaces reserved for electrical equipment.
Access requirements, including working clearances for mechanical controls and electrical equipment, and tube pull and service clearances.

B.
Certificates: For certification required in "Quality Assurance" Article.

C.
Source quality-control reports.

D.
Startup service reports.

E.
Warranty: Sample of special warranty.
1.7

CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS

A.
Operation and Maintenance Data: For each chiller to include in emergency, operation, and maintenance manuals.

B.
Warranties: Submit written special warranty as specified in this Section. Include contact information, description of coverage, and start date for each special warranty.
1.8

QUALITY ASSURANCE

A.
AHRI Certification: Certify chiller according to AHRI 590]certification program(s).

B.
AHRI Rating: Rate chiller performance according to requirements in AHRI 590.

C.
ASHRAE Compliance:


ASHRAE 15 for safety code for mechanical refrigeration.
ASHRAE 147 for refrigerant leaks, recovery, and handling and storage requirements.

D.
ASHRAE/IESNA Compliance: Applicable requirements in ASHRAE/IESNA 90.1-2013.

E.
ASME Compliance: Fabricate and label chiller to comply with ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code: Section VIII, Division 1, and include an ASME U-stamp and nameplate certifying compliance.

F.
Comply with NFPA 70.


G.  Comply with requirements of UL and UL Canada and include label by a qualified testing agency showing compliance.

DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING

Ship each chiller with a full charge of refrigerant. Charge each chiller with nitrogen if refrigerant is shipped in containers separate from chiller.

Ship each oil-lubricated chiller with a full charge of oil.

Comply with the manufacturer’s instructions for rigging and handling.

If unit is to be stored, comply with manufacturer instructions for storage.

COORDINATION

Coordinate sizes and locations of concrete bases with actual equipment provided. Cast anchor-bolt inserts into bases.

Coordinate system controls requirements accordingly. Unit supplier/manufacturer shall review the corresponding unit Control Diagram and Sequence of Operations included in the project drawing set. Supplier/manufacturer shall coordinate as necessary and shall provide the unit with all equipment, options, and features as necessary to provide the intended system operational control. Any discovered discrepancies shall be identified to the Project Manager via RFI prior to bid. Supplier/manufacturer shall coordinate with the Controls Contractor as necessary to provide a complete controls solution as indicated in the project documents.

WARRANTY

Special Warranty: Manufacturer's standard form in which manufacturer agrees to repair or replace components of chillers that fail in materials or workmanship within specified warranty period.

Extended warranties include, but are not limited to, the following:

Parts and labor.
Loss of refrigerant charge due to equipment component failure.

Warranty Period: Five years from date of Substantial Completion.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

PACKAGED, AIR-COOLED CHILLERS

Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:

Daikin
YORK International Corporation.

Description: Factory-assembled and run-tested chiller complete with base and frame, condenser casing, compressors, compressor motors and motor controllers, evaporator, condenser coils, condenser fans and motors, electrical power, controls, and accessories.


Cabinet:

Base: Galvanized-steel base extending the perimeter of chiller. Secure frame, compressors, and evaporator to base to provide a single-piece unit.
Frame: Rigid galvanized-steel frame secured to base and designed to support cabinet, condenser, control panel, and other chiller components not directly supported by base.
Casing: Galvanized steel.
Finish: Coat base, frame, and casing with a corrosion-resistant coating capable of withstanding a 500-hour salt-spray test according to ASTM B 117.
Sound-reduction package designed to reduce sound level without affecting performance and consisting of the following:

Acoustic enclosure around compressors.
Reduced-speed fans with acoustic treatment.

Compressors:

Description: Semi-hermetic twin-screw type.
Casing: Cast iron, precision machined for minimum clearance about periphery of rotors.
Rotors: Manufacturer's standard one- or two-rotor design.
Motor: Direct-drive, variable frequency drive (VFD) controlled to match the load requirement. Motor shall be suction gas cooled and protected by motor temperature sensors.
Each compressor provided with suction and discharge shutoff valves, crankcase oil heater, and suction strainer.

Service: Easily accessible for inspection and service.

Capacity Control: Shall utilize a VFD to unload each compressor from 100% to 25% of full load, resulting in a chiller minimum load of less than 15%. A volume index value is used to optimize the efficiency at full and part load conditions.

Maintain stable operation throughout range of operation. Configure to achieve most energy-efficient operation possible.
Operating Range: From 100 to 15 percent of design capacity.
Condenser-Air Unloading Requirements over Operating Range:	Constant-design entering condenser-air temperature.
For units equipped with a variable frequency controller, capacity control shall be both "valveless" and "stepless," requiring no slide valve or capacity-control valve(s) to operate at reduced capacity.

Oil Lubrication System: Consisting of pump if required, filtration, heater, cooler, factory-wired power connection, and controls.

Provide lubrication to bearings, gears, and other rotating surfaces at all operating, startup, shutdown, and standby conditions including power failure.
Thermostatically controlled oil heater properly sized to remove refrigerant from oil.
Factory-installed and pressure-tested piping with isolation valves and accessories.
Oil compatible with refrigerant and chiller components.
Positive visual indication of oil level.

Vibration Control:

Vibration Balance: Balance chiller compressors and drive assemblies to provide a precision balance that is free of noticeable vibration over the entire operating range.

Overspeed Test: 25 percent above design operating speed.

Isolation: Mount individual compressors on vibration isolators.


Compressor Motor Controllers:

Variable Frequency Controller:

Motor controller shall be factory mounted and wired on the chiller to provide a single-point, field-power termination to the chiller and its auxiliaries.
Description: NEMA ICS 2; listed and labeled as a complete unit and arranged to provide variable speed by adjusting output voltage and frequency.
Enclosure: Unit mounted, NEMA 250, Type 3R, with hinged full-front access door with lock and key.
Integral Disconnecting Means: Door-interlocked, NEMA AB 1, instantaneous-trip circuit breaker with lockable handle. Minimum withstand rating shall be as required by electrical power distribution system, but not less than 65,000 A.
Technology: Pulse width modulated (PWM) output suitable for constant or variable torque loads.
Motor current at start shall not exceed the rated load amperes, providing no electrical inrush.

Refrigerant Circuits:

Refrigerant Type: R-134a. Classified as Safety Group A1 according to ASHRAE 34.
Refrigerant Compatibility: Chiller parts exposed to refrigerants shall be fully compatible with refrigerants, and pressure components shall be rated for refrigerant pressures.
Refrigerant Circuit: Each shall include a thermal- or electronic-expansion valve, refrigerant charging connections, a hot-gas muffler, compressor suction and discharge shutoff valves, a liquid-line shutoff valve, a replaceable-corefilter-dryer, a sight glass with moisture indicator, a liquid-line solenoid valve, and an insulated suction line.
Pressure Relief Device:

Comply with requirements in ASHRAE 15 and in applicable portions of ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code: Section VIII, Division 1.
ASME-rated, spring-loaded pressure relief valve; single- or multiple-reseating type.

Evaporator:

Description: Shell-and-tube design.

Direct-expansion (DX) type with fluid flowing through the shell, and refrigerant flowing through the tubes within the shell.
Flooded type with fluid flowing through tubes and refrigerant flowing around tubes within the shell.

Code Compliance: Tested and stamped according to ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code: Section VIII, Division 1.
Shell Material: Carbon steel.
Shell Heads: Removable carbon-steel heads located at each end of the tube bundle.
Fluid Nozzles: Terminated with mechanical-coupling end connections for connection to field piping.
Tube Construction: Individually replaceable copper tubes with enhanced fin design, expanded into tube sheets.
Heater: Factory-installed and -wired electric heater with integral controls designed to protect the evaporator to minus 20 deg F (minus 29 deg C).

Air-Cooled Condenser:

Motors: Condenser-fan motors shall be totally enclosed, air over, variable speed, 3-phase type with permanently lubricated bearings and Class F insulation. Fans shall be 8-pole for standard tier units and 6-pole for medium and high tier units.
Fans: Direct-drive propeller type with statically and dynamically balanced fan blades, arranged for vertical air discharge.


Microchannel Coils: Coil shall be air-cooled and shall have a series of flat tubes containing a series of multiple, parallel flow microchannels layered between the refrigerant manifolds. Coils shall consist of a two-pass arrangement. Coil construction shall consist of aluminum alloys for fins, tubes, and manifolds in combination with a corrosion-resistant coating. Tubes shall be cleaned, dehydrated, and sealed. Assembled condenser coils shall be pressure tested at the coil factory at 660 psig (5448 kPa) and subsequently shall be leak tested at 145 psig ±5 psig (1000 kPa ±34.5 kPa) and pressure tested at 350 psig (2413 kPa) at final unit assembly.
Fan Guards: Steel safety guards with corrosion-resistant coating.

Electrical Power:

Factory-installed and -wired switches, motor controllers, transformers, and other electrical devices necessary shall provide a single-point, field-power connection to chiller.
House in a unit-mounted, NEMA 250, Type 3R enclosure.
Wiring shall be numbered and color-coded to match wiring diagram.
Install factory wiring outside of an enclosure in a raceway.
Field-power interface shall be to NEMA KS 1, heavy-duty, nonfused disconnect switch.

Disconnect means shall be interlocked with door operation.

Provide branch power circuit to each motor and to controls with one of the following disconnecting means:

NEMA KS 1, heavy-duty, fusible switch with rejection-type fuse clips rated for fuses. Select and size fuses to provide Type 2 protection according to IEC 60947-4-1.
NEMA AB 1, motor-circuit protector (circuit breaker) with field-adjustable, short-circuit-trip set point.

Provide each motor with overcurrent protection.
Overload relay sized according to UL 1995 or an integral component of chiller control microprocessor.
Phase voltage monitor to be furnished by chiller mfr, installed by contractor.
Phase-Failure and Undervoltage Relays: Solid-state sensing with adjustable settings.
Provide power factor correction capacitors to correct power factor to 0.90 at full load.
Control Transformer: Unit-mounted transformer with primary and secondary fuses and sized with enough capacity to operate electrical load plus spare capacity.

Power unit-mounted controls where indicated.
Power unit-mounted, ground fault interrupt (GFI) duplex receptacle.

Control Relays: Auxiliary and adjustable time-delay relays.
For chiller electrical power supply, indicate the following:

Current and phase to phase for all three phases.
Voltage, phase to phase, and phase to neutral for all three phases.
Three-phase real power (kilowatts).
Three-phase reactive power (kilovolt amperes reactive).
Power factor.
Running log of total power versus time (kilowatt-hours).
Fault log, with time and date of each.

Controls:

Standalone and microprocessor based.
Enclosure: Share enclosure with electrical power devices or provide a separate enclosure.


Operator Interface: Multiple-character digital or graphic display with dynamic update of information and with keypad or touch-sensitive display located on front of control enclosure. In either imperial or metric units, display the following information:

Date and time.
Operating or alarm status.
Operating hours.
Outdoor-air temperature if required for chilled-water reset.
Temperature and pressure of operating set points.
Entering and leaving temperatures of chilled water.
Refrigerant pressures in evaporator and condenser.
Saturation temperature in evaporator and condenser.
No cooling load condition.
Elapsed time meter (compressor run status).
Antirecycling timer status.
Percent of maximum motor amperage.
Current-limit set point.
Number of compressor starts.

Control Functions:

Manual or automatic startup and shutdown time schedule.
Entering and leaving chilled-water temperatures, control set points, and motor load limits. Chilled-water leaving temperature shall be reset based on return-water temperature.
Current limit and demand limit.
External chiller emergency stop.
Antirecycling timer.
Variable evaporator flow.

Manually Reset Safety Controls: The following conditions shall shut down chiller and require manual reset:

Low evaporator pressure or high condenser pressure.
Low chilled-water temperature.
Refrigerant high pressure.
High or low oil pressure.
High oil temperature.
Loss of chilled-water flow.
Control device failure.

Trending: Capability to trend analog data of up to five parameters simultaneously over an adjustable period and frequency of polling.
Security Access: Provide electronic security access to controls through identification and password with at least three levels of access: view only; view and operate; and view, operate, and service.
Control Authority: At least four conditions: Off, local manual control at chiller, local automatic control at chiller, and automatic control through a remote source.
BAS Interface: BACnet MS/TP communication interface shall enable control system operator to remotely control and monitor the water chiller from an operator workstation. Control features and monitoring points displayed locally at water chiller control panel shall be available through DDC system for HVAC.

Insulation:

Material: Closed-cell, flexible elastomeric, thermal insulation complying with ASTM C 534, Type I for tubular materials and Type II for sheet materials.
Thickness: 3/4 inch (19 mm).


Factory-applied insulation over cold surfaces of chiller components.

Adhesive: As recommended by insulation manufacturer and applied to 100 percent of insulation contact surface. Seal seams and joints.

Apply protective coating to exposed surfaces of insulation to protect insulation from weather.

Accessories:

Factory-furnished, chilled-water flow switches for field installation, provided by chiller mfr.
Individual compressor suction and discharge pressure gages with shutoff valves for each refrigerant circuit.
Factory-furnished spring isolators for field installation.

Characteristics:

Evaporator:

Configuration: Integral to chiller.
Pressure Rating: 150 psig (1034 kPa).
Fluid Type: 30% Ethylene Glycol.
Fouling Factor: 0.0001 sq. ft. x h x deg F/Btu (0.000018 sq. m x deg C/W).

Number of Refrigerant Circuits: Two.

SOURCE QUALITY CONTROL

Perform functional tests of chillers before shipping.

Factory run test each air-cooled chiller with water flowing through evaporator.

Factory test and inspect evaporator and condenser according to ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code: Section VIII, Division 1.

For chillers located outdoors, rate sound power level according to ARI 370.

PART 3 - EXECUTION

EXAMINATION

Examine chillers before installation. Reject chillers that are damaged.

Examine roughing-in for equipment support, anchor-bolt sizes and locations, piping, and electrical connections to verify actual locations, sizes, and other conditions affecting chiller performance, maintenance, and operations before equipment installation.

Final chiller locations indicated on Drawings are approximate. Determine exact locations before roughing-in for piping and electrical connections.

Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected.

CHILLER INSTALLATION

Install chillers on support structure indicated.


Equipment Mounting: Install chiller on concrete bases using elastomeric pads. Comply with requirements for concrete bases specified in Division 03 Section "Cast-in-Place Concrete." Comply with requirements for vibration isolation devices specified in Division 23 Section "Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC Piping and Equipment."

Maintain manufacturer's recommended clearances for service and maintenance.

Charge chiller with refrigerant and fill with oil if not factory installed.

Install separate devices furnished by manufacturer and not factory installed.

CONNECTIONS

Comply with requirements for piping specified in Division 23 Section "Hydronic Piping" and Division 23 Section “Refrigerant Piping”. Drawings indicate general arrangement of piping, fittings, and specialties.

Install piping adjacent to chiller to allow service and maintenance.

Evaporator Fluid Connections: Connect to evaporator inlet with shutoff valve, strainer, flexible connector, thermometer, and plugged tee with pressure gage. Connect to evaporator outlet with shutoff valve, balancing valve, flexible connector, flow switch, thermometer, plugged tee with shutoff valve and pressure gage, and drain connection with valve. Make connections to chiller with a flange or mechanical coupling.

Refrigerant Pressure Relief Device Connections: For chillers installed indoors, extend vent piping to the outdoors without valves or restrictions. Comply with ASHRAE 15. Connect vent to chiller pressure relief device with flexible connector and dirt leg with drain valve.

Connect each chiller drain connection with a union and drain pipe, and extend pipe, full size of connection, to floor drain. Provide a shutoff valve at each connection.

STARTUP SERVICE

Engage a factory-authorized service representative to perform startup service.

Complete installation and startup checks according to manufacturer's written instructions.
Verify that refrigerant charge is sufficient and chiller has been leak tested.
Verify that pumps are installed and functional.
Verify that thermometers and gages are installed.
Operate chiller for run-in period.
Check bearing lubrication and oil levels.
For chillers installed indoors, verify that refrigerant pressure relief device is vented outdoors.
Verify proper motor rotation.
Verify static deflection of vibration isolators, including deflection during chiller startup and shutdown.
Verify and record performance of chiller protection devices.
Test and adjust controls and safeties. Replace damaged or malfunctioning controls and equipment.

Inspect field-assembled components, equipment installation, and piping and electrical connections for proper assembly, installation, and connection.

Prepare test and inspection startup reports.


DEMONSTRATION

Engage a factory-authorized service representative to train Owner's maintenance personnel to adjust, operate, and maintain chillers.


END OF SECTION 23 6426


SECTION 26 0500 – COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR ELECTRICAL

PART 1 - GENERAL

1.1

RELATED DOCUMENTS

A.
Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to work of this Section.

B.
This Section shall apply to all Division 26 Sections.
1.2

SUMMARY

A.
This Section includes general administrative and procedural requirements for electrical installations. The following administrative and procedural requirements are included in this Section to expand the requirements specified in Division 01 Sections.


Codes and standards
Quality assurance
Examination of drawings and premises
Substitutions
Alternates
Permits, fees, and inspections
Changes involving Electrical Work
Submittals
Project record documents
Delivery, storage, and handling
Warranty
Scope of work specified in Division 26 sections
Related work specified in other Divisions
Systems provided by Owner

B.
Part II – Products:


This Section includes basic requirements for materials and installations for electrical work, including but not limited to:


Sealing of openings
Sleeves

C.
Part III – Execution:


1.	This section includes basic requirements for installations for electrical work.


Electrical demolition work
Cutting and patching
Coordination with other trades
Assembly and connection of equipment
Field quality control

CODES AND STANDARDS

The electrical characteristics, physical properties, design, performance characteristics, methods of construction, all material, and the installation techniques shall be in accordance with the latest issue of the various, applicable Standard Specifications of the following recognized authorities:

ADA – Americans with Disabilities Act


AEIC – Association of Edison Illuminating Companies
ANSI – American National Standards Institute
ASTM – ASTM International, formerly known as American Society for Testing and Materials
BICSI – Building Industry Consulting Service International
FCC – Federal Communications Commission
ICEA – Insulated Cable Engineers Association
IEC – International Electrotechnical Commission
IEEE – Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
MBC – Michigan Building Code
MIOSHA – Michigan Occupational Safety and Health Administration
NEC – National Electrical Code
NETA – InterNational Electrical Testing Association
NEMA – National Electrical Manufacturers Association
NFPA – National Fire Protection Association
OSHA – Occupational Safety and Health Administration
UL – UL, LLC, formerly known as Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Furnish all labor, materials, equipment, technical supervision, and incidental services required to complete, test, and leave ready for operation the electrical systems as specified in the Division 26 Sections and as indicated on Drawings.

The Electrical Drawings indicate the general design and extent of the electrical system. Comply with the Drawings as closely as actual construction of the building and the work of other Trades permit.

Perform all work in a first class and workmanlike manner in accordance with the latest accepted standards and practices for the Trades involved.

All equipment of the same or similar systems shall be by the same manufacturer.

Regulatory Requirements:

Codes, Standards, Ordinances, and Regulations: Perform all work in accordance with applicable Federal, State, and local ordinances and regulations. Perform all work to comply with Codes and Standards identified in these Specifications.

Notify the Architect/Engineer before submitting a proposal should any changes in Drawings or Specifications be required to comply with the above codes, standards, ordinances, and regulations. After entering into a contract, make all changes required to comply with the above codes, standards, ordinances, and regulations without additional expense to the Owner.
Barrier-Free Regulations: All materials and installations shall comply with the requirements of the State of Michigan Barrier-Free Regulations and with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).

Field Measurements:

Drawings are not intended to be scaled for roughing-in or to serve as shop drawings. Take all field measurements required for fitting the installation to the building.

Sequencing and Scheduling: Sequence and schedule work in order to avoid interference with the work of other Trades. Be responsible for removing and relocating any work which in the opinion of the Owner's Representatives causes interference.


1.5

EXAMINATION OF DRAWINGS AND PREMISES

A.
Before submitting the Bid, examine the Architectural, Mechanical, and other Trades’ Drawings and Specifications.


Notify the Architect/Engineer should any discrepancies occur between the other Trades and the electrical work.
No additional charges will be allowed because of failure to make this examination or to include all materials and labor required for the electrical work specified in other Trades’ documents.
The Architectural Drawings take precedence in all matters pertaining to the building structure, the Mechanical Drawings take precedence in all matters pertaining to the Mechanical Trades, and the Electrical Drawings take precedence in all matters pertaining to the Electrical Trades. However, where there are conflicts or differences between the Drawings for the various Trades, report such conflicts or differences to the Architect/Engineer who shall determine the course of action to be taken.

B.
Before submitting the Bid, examine the premises to determine existing conditions for performing the electrical work.


Notify the Architect/Engineer should any discrepancies occur between the existing conditions and the electrical work.
No additional charges will be allowed because of failure to make this examination or to include all materials and labor required to complete the electrical work.
1.6

SUBSTITUTIONS

A.
Base Bid shall be in accordance with materials and products specified. Any exceptions to this shall be approved in writing by the Architect/Engineer ten (10) days or more prior to bidding.
1.7

PERMITS, FEES, AND INSPECTIONS

A.
Obtain all permits, licenses, inspections, and tests required. At the completion of the work, obtain and send certificates of inspections and approvals to the Architect/Engineer.


Pay all fees and expenses for permits, licenses, tests, and inspections.
A copy of the final approved inspection certificates for electrical work specified in all Division 26 Sections shall be provided as a requirement prior to final payment.
1.8

CHANGES INVOLVING ELECTRICAL WORK

A.
The design of the electrical systems is based on the mechanical and building equipment specified and scheduled on the Drawings.


1. Where equipment changes are made that involve additional electrical work (increased motor horsepower or increased unit full load amperes, requirements for a disconnect switch scheduled to be part of the equipment, requirements for a starter scheduled to be part of the equipment, additional wiring of equipment, etc.) the Mechanical or respective Trades involved shall compensate the Electrical Trades for the cost of the additional work required.

SUBMITTALS

The following is in addition to the requirements for submittals in Division 01.

Material List: Submit a complete list of all materials and equipment indicating their manufacturer for approval by the Architect/Engineer within 15 days after award of contract and prior to submittal of shop drawings.

Construction Schedule: Submit a construction schedule including milestone dates and lead times for major electrical equipment.


Provide equipment submittals in the form of letters of intent, product data or, shop drawings as specified for all materials provided on the project.

Submittal Preparation: Place a permanent label or title block on each submittal for identification. Indicate the name of the entity that prepared each submittal on the label or title block.

Provide a space approximately 4” x 5” on the label or beside the title block on shop drawings to record the review and approval markings and the action taken.
Include the following information on the label for processing and recording action taken.

Project Name
Date
Name and address of Architect/Engineer
Name and address of Contractor
Name and address of Subcontractor
Name and address of Supplier
Name of Manufacturer
Number and title of appropriate Specification Section
Drawing number, identification mark, fixture type, panelboard number, specification section number, and detail references, or as noted on the Electrical Drawings.

Equipment submittals shall be reviewed by the Electrical Contractor for completeness and accuracy and prior to submitting to the Architect/Engineer for review. Submittals shall be dated and signed by the Electrical Contractor. Note on the submittal any and all exceptions or changes to the Drawings and Specifications required by the submittal to meet the specified products.

Partial submittals for equipment shall not be permitted. Where partial submittals are transmitted to the Architect/Engineer, they will be returned "Rejected”.

Where the equipment submittals consist of manufacturer's standard detail drawings or schedules and contain data for a variety of similar equipment, indicate the data pertinent to the equipment furnished for this project only. Standard detail drawings and schedules not clearly indicating which data is associated with this Project shall be returned "Rejected".

Where accessories and/or options are specified and do not appear as part of manufacturer's standard detail drawings or schedules, state each accessory that is to be provided with the equipment on the standard detail drawings or schedules.

The letter of intent shall state that the product is exactly as specified with no exceptions and that the product is being manufactured by one of the specified manufacturers. The letter of intent shall include the specification section number, the product description, and the name of the selected manufacturer. The aforementioned information shall be typed on the Electrical Contractor’s letterhead.

CADD files of the Electrical Drawings will be provided by the Architect/Engineer for this Contractor’s use in preparing submittals. Refer to Division 01 for the forms and procedures for requesting electronic files/media.

No apparatus or equipment shall be shipped from stock or fabricated until their equipment submittals have been reviewed and approved by the Architect/Engineer. By the review of submittals, the Architect/Engineer does not assume responsibility for actual dimensions or for the fit of completed work in position, nor does such review relieve Electrical Trades of full responsibility for the proper and correct execution of the work required.

PROJECT RECORD DOCUMENTS

Submit final project record documents as described in Division 01.


As-Built Drawings: At the completion of the work, submit to the Architect/Engineer the revised set of drawings in electronic file format indicating all changes from the bid documents using redlines, bubbles, or another approved method. The Drawings shall contain all title block information as originally issued by the Architect/Engineer with the addition of the Electrical Contractor’s company name, address, telephone number, company’s project number, date of issuance by the Electrical Contractor, and issued for “As-Built” in title.

Operation and Maintenance Manuals: The manuals shall contain operating instructions, service instructions, parts lists, etc., which are shipped with electrical equipment. At the completion of the work, transmit these items to the Owner. If this information is not shipped with the equipment, obtain it from the manufacturer.

Maintenance Materials: Retain all portable and detachable portions of the installation such as keys, tools, manuals, etc., until the completion of the work and then transmit them to the Owner and obtain itemized receipt. This receipt shall be provided as a requirement prior to final payment.

Record Documents Manual: At the completion of the work, furnish and deliver to the Owner and Architect/Engineer two (2) electronic sets on USB flash drive of the record documents manual.

One (1) copy of all shop drawings and product data
One (1) copy of operation and maintenance manuals
One (1) copy of as-built drawings

DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING

Storage and Protection: Provide adequate storage space for all electrical equipment, conduit, and materials delivered to the job site under a weather protected enclosure. Location of the space will be designated by the Owner’s Field Representative. Equipment set in place in unprotected areas must be provided with temporary protection.

Be responsible for the care and protection of electrical equipment until it has been fully tested and accepted.
Protect materials with permanent factory finish from damage by covering.
Protect conduit openings with temporary plugs or caps.

WARRANTY

Warranty: Provide a one-year parts and labor warranty from date of substantial completion for all equipment and installation. Comply with requirements of Division 01.

A copy of the warranty on the Electrical Contractor’s letterhead shall be provided as a requirement prior to final payment.

SCOPE OF WORK SPECIFIED IN DIVISION 26 SECTIONS

Furnish all labor, materials, equipment, technical supervision, and incidental services required to complete, test, and leave ready for operation the electrical systems as specified in the Division 26 Sections and as indicated on Drawings.

Provide control wiring greater than 100 volts for temperature, pressure, and level control devices and for solenoid valves, control relays, MCC control wiring, and all power wiring required for equipment specified hereinafter.

Provide empty raceway systems consisting of conduits, wireways, surface raceways, nylon pull strings, outlet boxes, pull boxes, cover plates, underfloor ducts, and cable trays as indicated for telephone, data, and audio/video wiring.


RELATED WORK SPECIFIED IN OTHER SECTIONS

Furnishing and mounting of all electric motors – Divisions 14, 21, 22 and 23.

Furnishing and installing low voltage instrumentation and control wiring – Divisions 21, 22 and 23, except where otherwise indicated.

Furnishing and mounting of starters, disconnect switches, control wiring, and integral controls on package self-contained building service equipment – Divisions 14, 21, 22 and 23, except as otherwise indicated.

Furnishing and installing field prime and finish painting – Division 09, except as specified in Division 26 Sections.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

CONCRETE

Provide concrete work required for the electrical installation. Concrete work shall include envelopes for underground conduits, housekeeping pads beneath equipment. Concrete work shall be in conformance with Division 03.

SEALING OF OPENINGS

Seal openings around electrical materials (conduit, raceways, cable trays, panels, etc.) with fire and smoke stop systems where floors, fire rated walls, and smoke barriers are penetrated. Fiberglass is not acceptable. Fire and smoke stop systems shall be UL listed and shall have a fire rating equal to or greater than the penetrated barrier. Fire and smoke stop systems shall be in conformance with Division 07.

SLEEVES

Provide conduit sleeves where conduits pass through concrete floors, walls, beams, and ceilings.

Sleeves shall be galvanized rigid steel conduit. Do not use aluminum conduit. Where specific sizes are not indicated on the Drawings, sleeves shall be sized to provide one-half (1/2) inch clearance around the outside surface of the item for which they were installed. They shall be cut flush with wall surfaces and shall extend one inch, or as directed, through floor. Sleeves shall be packed with approved non-combustible packing material and sealed with sealant to prevent passage of air, liquid, or fumes from one area to another. The filler and sealant materials used shall be rated at least equal in fire resistance to the construction material being penetrated. Floor sleeves shall be sealed between floor and sleeve with concrete grout.

PART 3 - EXECUTION

ELECTRICAL DEMOLITION WORK

General: Perform electrical demolition work in a systematic manner. Use such methods as outlined below to complete work indicated on the Drawings.

Obtain approval from the Owner prior to interrupting existing services. All service interruptions shall be at a time suitable to the Owner. Where the Owner approves service interruptions at times resulting in premium time work to this Contractor, this Contractor shall include the premium time in his Base Bid.


The associated raceway system (conduit, boxes, supports, etc.) and wire of equipment indicated to be demolished shall be removed from the equipment back to the source as noted below:

Power: Remove raceway system and wire back to the panel or power source.

When the circuit originates from the panel and serves no other loads, remove raceway system and wire back to the panel, and relabel the associated circuit breaker or fused switch as “spare”.
When the circuit originates from a panel but continues on to other loads not intended to be demolished, remove raceway system and wire back to first junction box.
When the removal of the circuit to the equipment to be demolished affects “downstream” devices not indicated to be demolished, re-feed “downstream” devices.

Raceway systems in walls to remain: Abandon raceway systems in place and install blank cover plates.
Raceway systems above accessible ceilings or other accessible locations: Remove raceway systems.

Perform a circuit trace prior to deactivating feeders and branch circuits to ensure maintaining electrical power in adjacent unrenovated area.

Conduit being demolished that is installed in floor slabs shall be cut 1/2 inch below the floor, and the floor shall be patched.

Where applicable, existing in-place raceway systems (conduit, boxes, supports, etc.) may be reused for new work providing that the installation is in accordance with requirements for new work found in Division 26 Sections.

Where equipment or fixtures are removed, outlets shall be properly blanked-off and conduits shall be capped. After alterations are completed, the entire installation shall present a “finished” look, as approved by the Architect/Engineer. The original function of the present electrical work to be modified shall not be changed unless required by the specific revisions to the system as specified or as indicated.

Materials salvaged from this work shall not be reused except where reuse is specifically indicated.

Existing fixtures and electrical equipment removed, not reused, and not specifically indicated to be turned over to the Owner shall be legally and properly disposed of off Owner’s property.

Existing fixtures and electrical equipment specifically indicated to be turned over to the Owner shall be disconnected, removed, and turned over to the Owner in an undamaged condition to an onsite storage area as directed by the Owner.

CUTTING AND PATCHING

Refer to Division 01 for requirements for cutting, patching, and refinishing work necessary for the installation of electrical work.

Direct miscellaneous cutting and patching of the existing building construction for the installation of the Electrical Work.

The cutting of holes through the existing building construction shall only be done by the use of abrasive saws and rotary coring machines. The use or hammer and drill points will not be permitted. The openings shall not be cut larger than necessary for the installation of the electrical work. Openings shall then be grouted in. Where existing piping, etc., is removed, the unused openings shall be grouted in.

The drilling or punching of structural members, such as holes through beams or columns, shall not be done without the specific permission of the Architect/Engineer.



E.
Cutting of holes through floors and walls shall be done only at such locations as directed by the Architect/Engineer.
F.
Cooperate with the other Trades so that all cutting and repairing in any given area will be done simultaneously.
G.
Electrical work which may interfere with building systems uncovered by the cutting of new openings in the present building including but not limited to piping, ducts, or other mechanical equipment as well as conduits and outlets shall be removed at the direction of the Architect/Engineer.
3.3

EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL

A.
Furnish excavating and backfilling to install electrical work. Refer to Electrical Drawings and Division 31 for methods and materials.
3.4

EQUIPMENT FOUNDATIONS AND SUPPORTS

A.
Furnish foundations and supports for electrical equipment and materials as required by codes, as listed hereinafter, and shown or noted on the Drawings.

B.
Provide necessary inserts, rods, structural steel frames, brackets, platforms, etc., for equipment suspended from ceilings or walls, such as conduits.
3.5

COORDINATION WITH OTHER TRADES

A.
Install work in order to avoid interferences with the work of other Trades. The Electrical Contractor shall be responsible for removing and relocating any work which, in the opinion of the Owner’s Representative, causes interferences.

B.
Should construction conditions prevent the installation of conduit, outlet boxes, junction boxes, conductors and/or other related equipment at locations shown on the Drawings, minor deviations may be permitted, shall be as directed by the Architect/Engineer and shall be made without additional cost to Owner.

C.
The Electrical Trades shall be responsible for all damage to other work caused by their work or through the neglect of their workers.


1.	All patching and repairing of any such damaged work shall be performed by the Trades which installed the work, but the cost shall be paid by the Electrical Trades.
3.6

ASSEMBLY AND CONNECTION OF EQUIPMENT

A.
Assembly of Equipment:


The Contract Drawings and Specifications indicate items to be purchased and installed which are noted by a manufacturer's name, catalog number and/or brief description.
The catalog number may not designate all the accessory parts and appurtenances required for the particular use or function.
Arrange with the manufacturer for the purchase of all items required for the complete installation and efficient operation.

B.
Equipment Connections:


Connections to equipment, motors, etc., shall be made in accordance with the shop drawings and rough-in measurements furnished by the manufacturers of the particular equipment furnished.
Any and all additional connections not shown on the Drawings but called for by the equipment manufacturer's shop drawings or required for the successful operation of the particular equipment furnished shall be installed as part of this Contract at no additional charge to the Owner.


FIELD QUALITY CONTROL

Testing Conduits: Conduits which are installed underground or concealed in concrete floor slab, foundations, etc., shall be cleared of foreign material and obstructions after installation and before conductor or pull wires are draw-in by wire brushing, swabbing, and employing an iron or hardwood mandrel which is 1/4" smaller in diameter than the internal diameter of the duct or conduit. Pulling wires shall be left in empty conduits.

Tests and Inspection:

When the systems are completed, operate equipment as directed by Architect/Engineer. Replace all faulty equipment. Make necessary adjustments before final acceptance.
Perform all tests required by State, City, County and/or other agencies having jurisdiction.
Provide all materials, equipment, etc., and labor required for tests.
Perform cable and equipment testing as specified.

Cleaning:

Keep premises free from accumulation of waste materials and rubbish. At the completion of the work, remove all rubbish from and about the building, and leave the electrical systems clean and ready for use.
Final clean-up shall include washing of fixture lenses, switchboards, substations, transformers, motor control centers, distribution panels, lighting panels, etc., to remove shipping and/or construction dust and debris. Fixture reflectors and/or lenses with water marks or cleaning streaks will not be accepted.

Painting:

In general, no painting is required by Electrical Trades other than touch-up of factory-finished electrical equipment.
All factory finished electrical equipment shall be cleaned at the completion of the work. Equipment showing rust or mars shall be thoroughly cleaned and sanded, prime coated, and touched up with enamel of color to match original finish.


END OF SECTION 26 0500


SECTION 26 0519 – LOW VOLTAGE ELECTRICAL POWER CONDUCTORS AND CABLES (0-1,000V) PART 1 - GENERAL
RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to work of this Section.

SUMMARY

This Section includes the following:

Conductors and cabling for building and structure electrical systems 600 volts and less.
Wire and cable systems as required, and all material and equipment, including wire, cable, connectors, lugs, fittings, and identification, as indicated or specified.

SUBMITTALS

General: Submit the following according to the Conditions of the Contract and Division 01 Specification Sections.

Letter of Intent: Submit a letter of intent stating compliance with drawings, specifications, and code:

Wire and cable, except interlocked armor cable
Connectors
Lugs
Insulating tape
Miscellaneous

Samples: Submit samples on request of the Architect-Engineer.

Submit test data for wire and cable upon request of the Architect-Engineer. Do not install wire and cable for which test data has been requested until test data is approved.

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Wire, Cable and Components: Listed by Underwriters' Laboratories as meeting NFPA 70 National Electrical Code requirements and be so labeled.

Furnish wire and cable on which standard factory tests established by AEIC, ANSI, ASTM, ICEA and NEMA have been performed.

DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING

Deliver all wire and cable to the site on reels or in coils, plainly marked for complete identification, including the wire or cable size, the number of conductors, type of wire or cable, length, weight, thickness and character of the insulation and the name of the manufacturer.


PART 2 - PRODUCTS

WIRE AND CABLE

General Requirements: Furnish wire and cable per standard specifications established for such material and construction by ASTM, ANSI, ICEA and NEMA, where applicable. All conductors shall be copper unless otherwise specified. Minimum size of conductors shall be No. 12 AWG, except 120 volt control conductors which may be No. 14 AWG and 90 volt and less shall be as specified. Furnish conductor sizes as indicated. Conductors shall be stranded for sizes No. 14 AWG and larger. Conductors smaller than No. 14 AWG shall be as specified in the sections requiring use of such conductors.

Manufacturer: Provide products of one of the following:

Cerrowire
Encore Wire
Prysmian Group
Republic Wire
Southwire

Wire for General Interior Use: Single conductor, annealed copper, 600 volts.

No. 10 AWG and smaller: NEC Type THHN/THWN insulation rated 90 degC in dry locations and 75 degC in wet locations or NEC Type THHN/THWN-2 or XHHW-2 insulation rated 90 degC in dry and wet locations.
No. 8 AWG and larger: NEC Type THHN/THWN-2 or XHHW-2 insulation rated 90 degC in dry and wet locations.

Wire for General Exterior Use: Single conductor, annealed copper, NEC Type XHHW-2 rated 90 degC in dry and wet locations, 600 volts.

Wire for Underground Duct or Conduit: Single conductor, annealed copper, NEC Type XHHW-2 rated 90 degC in dry and wet locations, 600 volts.

Wire for Direct Burial: Single or multi-conductor as indicated, annealed copper, NEC Type USE-2 insulation rated 90 degC in dry and wet locations, 600 volts, suitable for direct burial.

Cable types MC, MI, NM, NMC and NMS shall not be used unless specifically noted on the drawings or in the specifications.

LUGS FOR TERMINATING COPPER CONDUCTORS

Lugs for Terminating Power Conductors Up To and Including No. 8 AWG: Solderless type, manufacturer's standard, unless otherwise specified.

Lugs for Terminating Power Conductors No. 6 AWG and Larger: Solderless compression type, one hole for No. 6 AWG through No. 4/0 AWG inclusive, and two hole for larger sizes, copper, electro tin plated, rated 90 degC, 600 volts.

Manufacturer: Provide one of the following:

ABB “Color-Keyed”
Hubbell Burndy “Hylug”


Lugs for Terminating Control and Switchboard Wiring: Solderless compression type with tinned ring tongue.

Manufacturer: Provide one of the following:


ABB “Sta-Kon”
Hubbell Burndy “Hylug”
2.3

INSULATING TAPE

A.
General Use Tape:


Tape shall be vinyl all weather designed for continuous operation in -18°C to 105°C applications and shall be 7 mils thick.
Manufacturer: Provide one of the following:


a.	3M Scotch “Super 33+ Vinyl Electrical Tape”

B.
High Temperature Area Tape:


Tape shall be woven glass cloth designed for continuous operation in Class B (130°C) applications and shall be 17 mils thick.
Manufacturer: Provide products of one of the following:


3M Scotch “Glass Cloth Electrical Tape 27”
Plymouth Rubber “77 Plyglas”

C.
Arc and Fireproofing Tape:


Tape shall be flexible unsupported elastomer providing arc fault protection, flame resistant self- extinguishing to prevent flame propagation, and 30 mils thick.
Manufacturer: Provide products of the following:


a.	3M Scotch “Fire-Retardant Electric Arc Proofing Tape 77”
2.4

MISCELLANEOUS

A.
Wire Labels for Identification of Conductors.

Manufacturer: Provide products of one of the following:

ABB EZ CODE
Brady

PART 3 - EXECUTION

GENERAL

Install all wiring in raceway systems unless otherwise specified. Install wiring only in completed raceway systems and when systems are protected from the weather. Install conductors continuous, without splices, between equipment, where possible. Where splices are required, make up splices in boxes; do not use fittings for same.


Install phase and neutral conductors of each branch or feeder circuit in a single conduit except where paralleling circuits are indicated. Install paralleling circuits of identical makeup and length as the paralleled circuit, and terminate conductors at the same location, mechanically and electrically, at both ends, to ensure equal division of the total current between conductors.

All 120 volt branch circuits exceeding 100 feet in length shall be minimum size No. 10 AWG.

All 277 volt branch circuits exceeding 200 feet in length shall be minimum size No. 10 AWG.

For interior branch circuits, provide a separate neutral conductor for each phase conductor for circuits supplying 120 volt convenience receptacles, fluorescent ballasts, LED drivers and high intensity discharge ballasts. Sharing neutrals between phase conductors shall not be permitted.

Install conductors in such a manner that the bending radius of any wire or cable is not less than the minimum recommended by ICEA and/or the manufacturer. Do not exceed manufacturer's recommended values for maximum pulling tension applied to any wire or cable.

Connect all power wiring to equipment such that phasing shall be A-B-C-N left to right, top to bottom and front to back, where possible, and permanently identify phasing on the structure or housing adjacent to bus. Phase identification A-B-C is equivalent to transformer phase identification X1-X2-X3 and H1-H2-H3.

Connect phase wiring to all 3 phase receptacles to insure the same phase rotation in all receptacles with interchangeable plugs.

Use manufacturer-approved pulling compound or lubricant where necessary; compound used must not deteriorate conductor or insulation. Do not exceed manufacturer's recommended maximum pulling tensions and sidewall pressure values.

Use pulling means, including fish tape, cable, rope, and basket-weave wire/cable grips, that will not damage cables or raceway.

Tighten electrical connectors and terminals according to manufacturer's published torque-tightening values.

Make splices, terminations, and taps that are compatible with conductor material and that possess equivalent or better mechanical strength and insulation ratings than unspliced conductors.

Use oxide inhibitor in each splice, termination, and tap for aluminum conductors.

COLOR CODING, CONDUCTOR AND CABLE IDENTIFICATION

Provide single conductor cables having black or solid color coded insulation for power feeders and subfeeders. Identify individual feeder and subfeeder conductors as to phase connection and voltage by means of wire labels and color coding at each pull box, junction box, manhole, handhole, vault, lighting fixture handhole, splice and termination.

Refer to Section 260553 “Identification for Electrical Systems” for conductor and cable identification requirements.

SPLICES AND TERMINATIONS

Splice and terminate conductors with connectors and lugs as specified for the specific size and type of conductor. Do not splice armored cable except where cable lengths are limited by reel capacity. Do not splice direct burial cable underground. Indent all compression type connectors and lugs with tools as recommended by the connector or lug manufacturer.


Whenever aluminum or copper lugs are terminated on aluminum bus, use a Belleville washer and two tin or cadmium plated washers, one on each side in combination with aluminum joint compound on all contacting surfaces. Tighten bolts until Belleville washer is flat.

Insulate all bare surfaces of conductors with a minimum of four layers (half lap in two directions) of electrical insulating tape. On larger splices and terminals, build up connection with electrical insulating putty before applying tape, to eliminate both sharp edges and voids.

Terminate all armored cables at equipment with an approved type of armored cable terminator and terminate cable ground conductors on equipment ground bus. Where splices are required in armored cables, use metal pull box specified in Section 26 0533 and located outside of and adjacent to the tray, not in the tray.


END OF SECTION 26 0519


SECTION 26 0526 – GROUNDING AND BONDING FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS PART 1 - GENERAL
RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to work of this Section.

SUMMARY

This Section includes the following:

Grounding Conductors:

For General Use Above Grade: Bare copper.
For General Use Below Grade: Bare copper.
In Underground Ducts or Conduits: Insulated copper.
In Conduit with Copper Phase Conductors: Insulated copper.
For Isolated Grounding Systems: Insulated.

Grounding Connections:

To Structural Steel Used for Main Building Framing: Bolted lugs.
To Non-Permanently Fixed Equipment: Lugs bolted to the equipment.
Pipe and Equipment Grounding Conductor Terminations: Bolted connectors.
Connections to Ground Rods at Test Wells: Bolted connectors.
All Other Locations: Bolted connectors.

Markers and Identifiers

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Regulatory Requirements: Ground electrical system neutrals and non-current carrying parts of electrical equipment per the minimum requirements of NFPA 70 National Electrical Code, except where additional requirements are indicated or specified.

Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70 National Electrical Code by a Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory (NRTL) acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction for applications in which used and for specific types, sizes, and combinations of conductors and other items connected.

Comply with UL 467 for grounding and bonding materials and equipment.

Furnish tests on grounding systems as specified in Section 260570.

SUBMITTALS

General: Submit the following according to the Conditions of the Contract and Division 01 Specification Sections.

Letter of Intent: Submit a letter of intent stating compliance with drawings, specifications, and code:

Grounding conductors
Grounding connector
Markers and identifiers


PART 2 - PRODUCTS

GROUNDING CONDUCTORS

Bare Grounding Conductors: Stranded annealed copper.

Insulated Copper Grounding Conductors: Single conductor, stranded annealed copper, NEC Type THHN/THWN insulation rated 90 degC in dry locations and 75 degC in wet locations or NEC Type THHN/THWN-2 or XHHW-2 insulation rated 90 degC in dry and wet locations, 600 volts, color-coded green. Conductor No. 10 AWG and smaller may be solid in lieu of stranded.

Manufacturer: Provide products of one of the following, unless otherwise noted:

Cerrowire
Encore Wire
Prysmian Group
Republic Wire
Southwire

GROUNDING CONNECTIONS

Welded Connectors: Exothermic-welding kits of types recommended by kit manufacturer for materials being joined and installation conditions.

Manufacturer: Provide products of one of the following:

ABB Blackburn
Hubbell Burndy
nVent Erico

Mechanical-Type Bus-Bar Connectors: Cast silicon bronze, solderless compression-type wire terminals, and long-barrel, two-bolt connection to ground bus bar.

Compression-Type Bus-Bar Connectors: Copper or copper alloy, with two wire terminals.

Beam Clamps: Mechanical type, terminal, ground wire access from four directions, with dual, tin-plated or silicon bronze bolts.

Cable-to-Cable Connectors: Compression type, copper or copper alloy.

Cable Tray Ground Clamp: Mechanical type, zinc-plated malleable iron.

Conduit Hubs: Mechanical type, terminal with threaded hub.

Ground Rod Clamps: Mechanical type, copper or copper alloy, terminal with hex head bolt.

Lay-in Lug Connector: Mechanical type, copper rated for direct burial terminal with set screw.

Service Post Connectors: Mechanical type, bronze alloy terminal, in short- and long-stud lengths, capable of single and double conductor connections.

Signal Reference Grid Clamp: Mechanical type, stamped-steel terminal with hex head screw.

Straps: Solid copper, cast-bronze clamp or copper lugs. Rated for 600 A.


Tower Ground Clamps: Mechanical type, copper or copper alloy, terminal one- or two-piece clamp.

U-Bolt Clamps: Mechanical type, copper or copper alloy, terminal listed for direct burial.

Water Pipe Clamps:

Mechanical type, two pieces with stainless steel bolts.

Material: Copper alloy.
Listed for direct burial.

U-bolt type with malleable-iron clamp and copper ground connector rated for direct burial.

Manufacturers: Provide products of the following, unless otherwise noted:

ABB Thomas & Betts including Blackburn
Emerson Appleton
Emerson O-Z/Gedney
Hubbell Anderson
Hubbell Burndy
nVent Erico
Penn Union

MARKERS AND IDENTIFIERS

Underground Hazard Tape: Non-adhesive, vinyl or polyester, 3-inch wide, black letters on yellow background “CAUTION-BURIED GROUND WIRE”.

ABB Thomas & Betts
Panduit
Stranco Products

PART 3 - EXECUTION

INSTALLATION

Install conductors of minimum size required by NFPA 70 National Electrical Code except where sizes exceeding the requirements are indicated.

Thoroughly clean all bonding surfaces of non-conducting materials. Where bolted connections are used, treat surfaces with a corrosion-inhibiting compound.

Where insulated conductors are used, thoroughly tape all exposed splices and connections. Encapsulate below grade splices and connections so that bare conductors are not in contact with earth.

Where metallic conduit is used for mechanical protection of a ground conductor, bond conductor to the conduit at each end.

For electrical system neutral grounding, do not use conductor sizes smaller than No. 8 AWG.

Where non-metallic conduit is used, install a ground conductor in the conduit with the circuit conductors. The ground conductor may be a separate conductor, a conductor of a multi-conductor cable, or wires in the interstices of cabled circuit conductors. Size the ground conductors per NEC requirements except where noted otherwise.


Provide an equipment grounding conductor, within the raceway along with phase conductors, for all feeders and branch circuits.

Provide an equipment grounding conductor within all flexible conduits.

The metallic enclosures and exposed noncurrent-carrying metal parts of all electrical equipment shall be grounded by connection with an equipment grounding conductor. This includes boxes, receptacles, etc.


END OF SECTION 26 0526


SECTION 26 0533 - RACEWAYS AND BOXES FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS PART 1 - GENERAL
1.1

RELATED DOCUMENTS

A.
Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to work of this Section.
1.2

SUMMARY

A.
Raceway systems as required, and all equipment and material, including conduit, fittings, boxes, wireways, and cable trays, as indicated or specified.
1.3

SUBMITTALS

A.
Product Data: Submit complete data on each item. Coordinate the items, as they relate to the work, prior to submittal. Shop drawings shall include:


Conduit and fittings
Boxes

B.
Submit Owner's Operation and Maintenance Manuals for systems and equipment as follows:
1.4

QUALITY ASSURANCE

A.
Regulatory Requirements: Work in Hazardous Areas in accordance with Article 500 of the National Electrical Code.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

CONDUIT

Rigid Galvanized Steel (RGS) Conduit, Elbows, and Couplings: Zinc-coated hot dip galvanized threaded steel per ANSI C80.1 "Specification for Rigid Steel Conduit, Zinc-Coated" and UL6. Each length of conduit shall be threaded on both ends.

Manufacturer: Provide products of one of the following:

Allied
Republic
Wheatland

Electrical Metallic Tubing (EMT): Zinc-coated steel per ANSI C80.3-1977 "Specification for Electrical Metallic Tubing, Zinc-Coated".

Manufacturer: Provide products of one of the following:

Allied
Republic
Wheatland


Liquid-Tight Flexible Steel Conduit: Per UL-1, "Flexible Steel Conduit", with a PVC jacket.

Manufacturer: Provide products of one of the following:

Anaconda
Sealtite
Electriflex

ELECTRICAL PLASTIC CONDUIT

PVC Conduit and Tubing Fittings: NEMA TC 3, mate and match to conduit or tubing type and material.

Conduit and Tubing Accessories: Provide conduit, tubing and duct accessories of types, sizes and materials, complying with manufacturer's published product information, which mate and match conduit and tubing.

Manufacturers: Provide products of one of the following:

Cantex
Prime Conduit, Inc.
National Pipe

CONDUIT FITTINGS

Fittings for Rigid Galvanized Steel Conduit: Cast or malleable iron bodies, cadmium or zinc-plated, with taper threads, screw attached cover plates, and gaskets when located in areas requiring gaskets as specified in Part 3.

Manufacturer: Provide products of one of the following:

Appleton Form 35
Crouse-Hinds Form 8
Steel City/Thomas & Betts
Topaz

Expansion Fittings for Rigid Galvanized Steel Conduit: Cast or malleable iron bodies, with threaded end caps for receiving fixed and movable conduits, metallic pressure packing and copper bonding jumper assembly, and providing for a minimum of 2 inches movement of the conduit in either direction.

Manufacturer: Provide products of one of the following:

Appleton Type XJ
Crouse-Hinds Type XJ
O-Z Type AX
Thomas & Betts Type XJG

Couplings and Connectors for EMT: Zinc-plated steel, compression or set screw type.

Manufacturer: Provide products of one of the following:

Appleton
ETP
Midwest
Steel City/Thomas & Betts


Conduit Unions on Continuous Run:

Manufacturer: Provide products of the following:

Erickson

Expansion Fittings for EMT:

Manufacturer: Provide products of the following:

Thomas & Betts Type XJG

Fittings for Liquid-Tight Flexible Steel Conduit: Designed to maintain the liquid-tight feature of the installation.

Manufacturer: Provide products of one of the following:

Appleton ST Series
ETP
Thomas & Betts 5331 to 5360

Locknuts for Rigid Steel Conduit: Malleable iron or steel, zinc or cadmium plated.

Bushings for 1 Inch and Smaller Rigid Steel Conduits: Insulating plastic type of non-burnable thermosetting phenolic, conforming to Underwriters' Laboratories requirements. Do not furnish non-rigid plastic bushings.

Bushings for 1-1/4 Inch and Larger Rigid Steel Conduits: Malleable iron or steel, zinc or cadmium plated, with insulating insert of thermosetting plastic as specified for smaller conduit bushings, molded and locked into the bushing ring.

OUTLET BOXES

Sheet Steel Boxes: Galvanized or sherardized stock not less than No. 14 gage, with knockout openings, single or multiple gang, with extensions, adapters, plaster rings, tile covers, fixture studs and cover plates. Furnish accessories with same gage and finish as specified for boxes, except where special finishes are specified for covers and device plates in Section 26 2726. Provide sizes per NEC requirements for wiring space, except where minimum sizes are specified under Part 3.

Manufacturer: Provide products of one of the following:

Appleton
RACO
Steel City

PULL AND JUNCTION BOXES

Boxes Less than 5 Inches by 5 Inches: Conform to requirements specified for Outlet Boxes.


Cast or Malleable Iron Boxes: Code gage, with threaded hubs or conduit bosses for field drilling and tapping, screw fastened cover of same gage as box. Fasten cover with brass machine screws. Galvanize box and cover after fabrication. Provide sizes conforming to NEC requirements for wiring space, except where boxes of larger size are indicated. Furnish gaskets when located in areas requiring gaskets as specified in Part 3.

Manufacturer: Provide products of one of the following:

Hoffman
O-Z

MISCELLANEOUS

Trapeze Hangers

Manufacturer: Provide products of one of the following:

Kindorf
Powerstrut
Unistrut

Sealant: Single component, non-sage urethane:

Manufacturer: Provide products of one of the following:

Sika Corporation “Sikaflex 1a”
Pecora Corporation "Dynatrol 1"
Sonneborn "Sonolastic NP-1"
Tremco “Dymonic”

PART 3 - EXECUTION

CONDUIT SYSTEMS

Install RGS conduit for all feeders 2” in diameter or larger.

Install RGS conduit for conduit in “unfinished” or “open” areas up to 10’-0” above finished floor.

Install RGS conduit for conduits passing through foundation walls with a 3 inch minimum concrete wall around the conduits and five (5) feet both sides of the wall.

Install RGS conduit for conduits routed below the building floor slab.

Install RGS conduit for conduit elbows used to transition from below the slab and for all RGS conduit imbedded in the slab to vertical risers passing through the floor slab.

EMT compression type connectors and couplings shall be used for all EMT conduits routed in damp locations or when the use of EMT in lieu of RGS is approved by the Engineer for exposed exterior locations. The use of set screw connectors and couplings is permitted for all other EMT raceways where equipment ground wires exist.

Install EMT in “unfinished areas” 10’-0” above finished floor.

Install liquid-tight flexible steel conduit for final connections to all motors and other equipment subject to vibration or movement. Flexible conduits shall not exceed 6’-0” in length.


Install conduit systems as indicated, as required by the NEC, and as specified. Install conduit sizes as indicated. Where conduit sizes are not indicated, install sizes per NEC requirements, except do not use conduit sizes smaller than 3/4 inch. The use of 1/2” conduit is permitted from receptacle outlet boxes and switch outlet boxes to the nearest junction mounted in the ceiling space. 3/4” conduit minimum shall be used from the panelboards to the junction boxes and between junction boxes. Use 1/2 inch fixture stems optionally, unless otherwise indicated.

Install conduit concealed in office and similar finished areas, and exposed in all other areas unless otherwise indicated or specified.

Install all exposed and concealed conduit runs parallel or perpendicular to walls, structural members, or intersections of vertical planes and ceilings. Keep conduit at least six inches away from parallel runs of high temperature surfaces, such as steam or hot water pipes and do not run conduit directly under cold water lines.

Group conduit for common support, where indicated and elsewhere as directed by the Architect-Engineer.

Do not install crushed or deformed conduits and avoid trapped runs in damp or wet locations. Take care to prevent the entrance of water and the lodging of concrete, plaster, dirt or trash in conduit, boxes, fittings and equipment during the course of construction. Free conduit of obstructions or replace the conduits. Where conduit joints occur in concrete slabs, or in damp or wet locations, make joints watertight by applying an approved compound on the entire thread area before assembling. Draw up all conduit joints as tightly as possible. Cap exposed empty conduits which do not terminate in outlets, panels, cabinets, etc. with standard galvanized plumbers pipe caps. Plug empty conduits which terminate flush with floors or walls with flush coupling and brass plug.

Install conduit sleeves for all exposed conduits and cables passing through walls, ceilings or floors, and fill the void between sleeve and conduit with sealant flush with the end of the sleeve to seal the opening.

For conduit sleeves passing through fire rated walls, floors or ceilings, comply with requirements of Section 078413 “Through-Penetration Firestop Systems”.

Terminate conduit stubbed up through concrete floors for connections to free standing equipment with a coupling flush with finish floor, and extend rigid conduit to equipment, except that where required, use flexible conduit from a point 6 inches above the floor.

Make changes in direction of runs with symmetrical bends, fittings or pull boxes. Do not use bends around outside corners; use fittings for same. Install elbows, bends and offsets having a minimum radius of curvature of 24 inches for 2 inch and 2-1/2 inch conduit, and 36 inches for 3 inch and larger conduit. Except where conduit runs are shown in exact detail, install pull points at not greater than 200 foot intervals in straight runs. Where bends are included between pull points, reduce this maximum permissible 200 foot separation between pull points by 50 feet for each 90 degree bend and 25 feet for each 45 degree bend. Figure deductions for all other angle bends on a similar basis. When bends are made in the field, make bends with an approved hickey or conduit bending machine. Make bends in 1-1/4 inch and larger conduits with standard conduit ells where possible.

Provide conduit nipples with two independent sets of threads. Do not use running threads on any part of the conduit system. Where conditions require joining two fixed conduits into a continuous run, use a conduit union, in place of running threads and coupling.

Install expansion fittings in exposed conduit runs of excessive length, where conduits cross building expansion joints, and where indicated.

Install double locknuts and bushings on all rigid conduit terminations into threadless openings. Increase length of conduit threads at terminations sufficiently to permit the bushing to be fully seated against the end of the conduit.


Use one hole malleable iron galvanized pipe straps for support of single conduits, or clevis type hangers. Support groups of conduit on trapeze hangers. Use threaded rod or pipe for hanger support. Do not use perforated strap or wire for conduit or hanger support. Use beam clamps or malleable iron or wrought steel with hook rods to grip the beam flange for conduit or hanger support; do not use C-clamp type fittings. Support exposed conduit at least every 8 feet if smaller than 2 inch, and every 10 feet if 2 inch and larger unless otherwise noted.

OUTLET, SWITCH, JUNCTION AND PULL BOXES

Outlet Boxes for Use with Rigid Steel Conduit in Non-Hazardous Areas: Do not use sheet steel outlet boxes in utility or factory areas.

Outlet Boxes for Use with Electrical Metallic Tubing: Sheet steel for flush or concealed work; cast or malleable iron for exposed locations.

Flush Mounted Boxes: For single gang outlets and two gang outlets, use boxes not less than 4 inches square and 2-1/8 inches deep with single gang and two gang plaster reducing ring. For multiple outlets, use gang type boxes not less than 2-1/4 inches deep. Plaster rings shall not be less than 3/4 inches deep. For ceiling outlets in concrete slabs, use boxes not less than 3 inches deep.

Gaskets: Provide cover gaskets for boxes in damp or wet locations and in factory areas.

Pull and Junction Boxes for Use with Each Type of Conduit: As specified for outlet boxes for each conduit type under above paragraphs.

Install boxes in the wiring or raceway systems as required for pulling of wires, making connections, and mounting of devices and fixtures.

Install extension rings, adapters, raised covers and plaster rings on flush mounted boxes as required. Equip flush mounted boxes in masonry block or tile walls with tile covers.

Support boxes independent of conduit and secure rigidly in place. Install boxes used for fixture support such that they are capable of carrying 100 pounds.


END OF SECTION 26 0533


SECTION 26 0553 - IDENTIFICATION FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS

PART 1 - GENERAL

1.1

RELATED DOCUMENTS

A.
Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.
1.2

SUMMARY

A.
Section Includes:


Equipment identification nameplates
Raceway identification
Armored and metal-clad cable identification
Power and control cable identification
Floor marking tape
Underground-line warning tape
Warning labels and signs
Instruction signs
Cable ties
Miscellaneous identification products
1.3

ACTION SUBMITTALS

A.
Product Data: For each electrical identification product indicated.

B.
Samples: For each type of label and sign to illustrate size, colors, lettering style, mounting provisions, and graphic features of identification products.

C.
Identification Schedule: An index of nomenclature of electrical equipment and system components used in identification signs and labels.
1.4

QUALITY ASSURANCE

A.
Comply with ANSI A13.1.

B.
Comply with NFPA 70.

C.
Comply with 29 CFR 1910.144 and 29 CFR 1910.145.

D.
Comply with ANSI Z535.4 for safety signs and labels.

E.
Adhesive-attached labeling materials, including label stocks, laminating adhesives, and inks used by label printers, shall comply with UL 969.
1.5

COORDINATION

A.
Coordinate identification names, abbreviations, colors, and other features with requirements in other Sections requiring identification applications, Drawings, Shop Drawings, manufacturer's wiring diagrams, and the Operation and Maintenance Manual; and with those required by codes, standards, and 29 CFR 1910.145. Use consistent designations throughout Project.

B.
Coordinate installation of identifying devices with completion of covering and painting of surfaces where devices are to be applied.


Coordinate installation of identifying devices with location of access panels and doors.

Install identifying devices before installing acoustical ceilings and similar concealment.

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

EQUIPMENT IDENTIFICATION NAMEPLATES

Engraved, Plastic Laminate or Laminated Acrylic: Punched or drilled for screw mounting. Black engraved letters on a white face. Minimum letter height shall be 1/4 inch.

RACEWAY IDENTIFICATION

Comply with ANSI A13.1 for minimum size of letters for legend and for minimum length of color field for each raceway size.

Colors for Raceways Carrying Circuits as specified voltages:

Black letters on a yellow field for 250V or less.
Black letters on a red field for over 250V and less than 600V.
Black letters on an orange field for circuits over 600V.
Legend for Systems below 600V: Indicate voltage.
Legend for systems over 600V: "DANGER CONCEALED HIGH VOLTAGE WIRING" with 3 inch high letters on 20 inch centers.

Self-Adhesive Vinyl Labels for Raceways Carrying Circuits at 600 V or Less: Preprinted, flexible label laminated with a clear, weather- and chemical-resistant coating and matching wraparound adhesive tape for securing ends of legend label.

Snap-Around Labels for Raceways Carrying Circuits at 600 V or Less: Slit, pretensioned, flexible, preprinted, color-coded acrylic sleeve, with diameter sized to suit diameter of raceway or cable it identifies and to stay in place by gripping action.

Tape and Stencil for Raceways Carrying Circuits More Than 600 V: 4 inch black stripes on 10 inch centers diagonally over orange background that extends full length of raceway or duct and is 12 inches wide. Stop stripes at legends.

Metal Tags: Brass or aluminum, 2 by 2 by 0.05 inch, with stamped legend, punched for use with self- locking cable tie fastener.

POWER AND CONTROL CABLE IDENTIFICATION

Color-Coding Conductor Tape: Colored, self-adhesive vinyl tape not less than 3 mils thick by 1 to 2 inches wide.

Self-Adhesive Vinyl Labels: Preprinted, flexible label laminated with a clear, weather- and chemical- resistant coating and matching wraparound adhesive tape for securing ends of legend label.

Snap-Around Labels: Slit, pretensioned, flexible, preprinted, color-coded acrylic sleeve, with diameter sized to suit diameter of raceway or cable it identifies and to stay in place by gripping action.

Marker Tapes: Vinyl or vinyl-cloth, self-adhesive wraparound type, with circuit identification legend machine printed by thermal transfer or equivalent process.



E.
Write-On Tags:	Polyester tag, 0.015 inch thick, with corrosion-resistant grommet and cable tie for attachment to conductor or cable.

Marker for Tags: Permanent, waterproof, black ink marker recommended by tag manufacturer.
Marker for Tags: Machine-printed, permanent, waterproof, black ink marker recommended by printer manufacturer.
2.4

FLOOR MARKING TAPE

A.
2 inch wide, 5 mil pressure-sensitive vinyl tape, with black and white stripes and clear vinyl overlay.
2.5

UNDERGROUND-LINE WARNING TAPE

A.
Tape:


Recommended by manufacturer for the method of installation and suitable to identify and locate underground electrical and communications utility lines.
Printing on tape shall be permanent and shall not be damaged by burial operations.
Tape material and ink shall be chemically inert, and not subject to degrading when exposed to acids, alkalis, and other destructive substances commonly found in soils.

B.
Color and Printing:


Comply with ANSI Z535.1 through ANSI Z535.5.
Power Conduits and Cables Red-Colored Tapes with these legends:	ELECTRIC LINE FOR SYSTEMS LESS THAN 600V, HIGH VOLTAGE FOR SYSTEMS ABOVE 600V.
Communications Conduits and Cables Orange-Colored Tapes with the appropriate legends: TELEPHONE CABLE, CATV CABLE, COMMUNICATIONS CABLE, OPTICAL FIBER CABLE.

C.
Tag:


Multilayer laminate consisting of high-density polyethylene scrim coated with pigmented polyolefin, bright-colored, continuous-printed on one side with the inscription of the utility compounded for direct-burial service.
Thickness: 12 mils.
Weight: 36.1 lb/1000 sq. ft.
3 Inch Tensile According to ASTM D 882: 400 lbf, and 11,500 psi.

WARNING LABELS AND SIGNS

Comply with NFPA 70 and 29 CFR 1910.145.

Self-Adhesive Warning Labels: Factory-printed, multicolor, pressure-sensitive adhesive labels, configured for display on front cover, door, or other access to equipment unless otherwise indicated.

Baked-Enamel Warning Signs:

Preprinted aluminum signs, punched or drilled for fasteners, with colors, legend, and size required for application.
1/4 inch grommets in corners for mounting.
Nominal size, 7 by 10 inches.

Warning label and sign shall include, but are not limited to, the following legends:

Workspace Clearance Warning:	"WARNING - OSHA REGULATION - AREA IN FRONT OF ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT MUST BE KEPT CLEAR FOR 36 INCHES."


CABLE TIES

General-Purpose Cable Ties: Fungus inert, self extinguishing, one piece, self locking, Type 6/6 nylon.

Minimum Width: 3/16 inch.
Tensile Strength at 73 deg F, According to ASTM D 638: 12,000 psi.
Temperature Range: Minus 40 to plus 185 deg F.
Color: Black except where used for color-coding.

UV-Stabilized Cable Ties: Fungus inert, designed for continuous exposure to exterior sunlight, self extinguishing, one piece, self locking, Type 6/6 nylon.

Minimum Width: 3/16 inch.
Tensile Strength at 73 deg F, According to ASTM D 638: 12,000 psi.
Temperature Range: Minus 40 to plus 185 deg F.
Color: Black.

MISCELLANEOUS IDENTIFICATION PRODUCTS

Paint: Comply with requirements in Division 09 painting Sections for paint materials and application requirements. Select paint system applicable for surface material and location (exterior or interior).

Fasteners for Labels and Signs: Self-tapping, stainless-steel screws or stainless-steel machine screws with nuts and flat and lock washers.

PART 3 - EXECUTION

INSTALLATION

Verify identity of each item before installing identification products.

Location: Install identification materials and devices at locations for most convenient viewing without interference with operation and maintenance of equipment.

Apply identification devices to surfaces that require finish after completing finish work.

Self-Adhesive Identification Products: Clean surfaces before application, using materials and methods recommended by manufacturer of identification device.

Attach signs and plastic labels that are not self-adhesive type with mechanical fasteners appropriate to the location and substrate.

System Identification Color-Coding Bands for Raceways and Cables: Each color-coding band shall completely encircle cable or conduit. Place adjacent bands of two-color markings in contact, side by side. Locate bands at changes in direction, at penetrations of walls and floors, at 50 foot maximum intervals in straight runs, and at 25 foot maximum intervals in congested areas.

Aluminum Wraparound Marker Labels and Metal Tags: Secure tight to surface of conductor or cable at a location with high visibility and accessibility.

Cable Ties: For attaching tags. Use general-purpose type, except as listed below:

Outdoors: UV-stabilized nylon.


Underground-Line Warning Tape: During backfilling of trenches install continuous underground-line warning tape directly above line at 6 to 8 inches below finished grade. Use multiple tapes where width of multiple lines installed in a common trench exceeds 16 inches overall.

Painted Identification: Comply with requirements in Division 09 painting Sections for surface preparation and paint application.

EQUIPMENT IDENTIFICATION NAMEPLATES

Equipment Identification Nameplates: On each unit of equipment, install unique designation label that is consistent with one line diagram tag nameplates, wiring diagrams, schedules, and the Operation and Maintenance Manual

Labeling Instructions:

Indoor and Outdoor Equipment: Engraved, laminated acrylic or melamine label. Unless otherwise indicated, provide a single line of text with 1/4 inch high letters on 1-1/2 inch high label.
Elevated Components: Increase sizes of labels and letters to those appropriate for viewing from the floor.
Fasten nameplates with appropriate mechanical fasteners that do not change the NEMA or NRTL rating of the enclosure.

Equipment to Be Labeled:

Motor starters
Variable-speed controllers

RACEWAYS AND CONDUCTOR IDENTIFICATION SCHEDULE

Accessible Raceways, 600 V or Less, for Feeder, and Branch Circuits 100 amperes or more and 120 volts or more to ground:

Self-adhesive vinyl tape applied in bands. Install labels at 30 foot maximum intervals.

Conductor Identification, 600 V or Less:

Identify individual phase conductors, neutral conductor and ground conductor of branch power and lighting circuits as to phase and system voltage by means of color coding in conformance with Sections 200-6 and 210-5 of the NEC.
Use the following identification scheme unless there are existing schemes being utilized by the Owner:

Phase
Neutral
Equipment Grounding Conductor

System
A
B
C
Normal Power
Emergency Power


X
Y
Z
N
N
GRD.
Any Voltage
Black
Red
Blue
White
White/Red tracer
Green
120/208 Volt
Brown
Orange
Yellow
Gray
Gray/Red tracer
Green/Yellow Tracer
277/480 Volt

Where color schemes deviate from above, submit color schemes for approval of the Architect-Engineer prior to implementation. Provide conductor color coding by means of colored insulating materials or by means of colored wire labels attached to individual conductors in all outlet, pull or junction boxes and at all terminations.


Install color coding scheme labels at each switchboard, panelboard, distribution panel, power panel and motor control center.
Field-Applied, Color-Coding Conductor Tape: Apply in half-lapped turns for a minimum distance of 6 inches from terminal points and in boxes where splices or taps are made. Apply last two turns of tape with no tension to prevent possible unwinding. Locate bands to avoid obscuring factory cable markings.

Identify cable groups and conduit at terminations.

Tags shall be 1/8 inch thick lead die-stamped tags with punched ears. Fasten tags around the cable group or conduit with No. 12 AWG copper wire.

Designate source and load, or feeder or cable identification on tags. Submit identification for the approval of the Architect-Engineer.

Auxiliary Systems Conductor Identification:

Identify field-installed control, and signal connections.
Identify conductors, cables, and terminals in enclosures and at junctions, terminals, and pull points. Identify by system and circuit designation.
Use system of marker tape designations that is uniform and consistent with system used by manufacturer for factory-installed connections.
Coordinate identification with Project Drawings, manufacturer's wiring diagrams, and the Operation and Maintenance Manual.

Underground Lines:

Identify with underground-line warning tape for power, communication, and control wiring.
Install underground-line warning tape for both direct-buried cables and cables in raceway.

Workspace Indication:

Install floor marking tape to show working clearances in the direction of access to live parts.
Workspace shall be as required by NFPA 70 and 29 CFR 1926.403 unless otherwise indicated. Do not install at flush-mounted panelboards and similar equipment in finished spaces.

Warning Labels for Indoor Cabinets, Boxes, and Enclosures for Power: Self-adhesive warning labels.

Comply with 29 CFR 1910.145.
Identify system voltage with black letters on an orange background.
Apply to exterior of door, cover, or other access.


END OF SECTION 26 0553


SECTION 26 2726 - WIRING DEVICES

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to work of this Section.

SUMMARY

This Section includes the following:

Receptacle services as required, and all materials and equipment, including receptacles, device plates and multi-outlet assemblies, as indicated or specified.
Device cover plates including for devices specified in other sections.

SUBMITTALS

General: Submit the following according to the Conditions of the Contract and Division 01 Specification Sections.

Product Data: Submit product data on each item. Coordinate the items, as they relate to the work, prior to submittal. Include the following:

Wall switch device plates
All receptacles and clock outlets including device plates.
Multi-outlet assemblies

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

CONVENIENCE RECEPTACLES

15 Ampere Duplex Convenience Receptacles for 120 Volt, Single Phase Service: Two straight blade, 2 pole, 3 wire, NEMA configuration 5-15R receptacles rated 15 amperes, 125 volts, NEMA performance standard, specification grade, for back and side wiring, brown color.

Manufacturer: Provide one of the following:

Arrow-Hart 5262
Bryant 5262
General Electric GE4065-1
Hubbell 5262
Pass & Seymour 5262

20 Ampere Duplex Convenience Receptacles for 120 Volt, Single Phase Service: Two straight blade, 2 pole, 3 wire, NEMA configuration 5-20R receptacles rated 20 amperes, 125 volts, NEMA performance standard, specification grade, for back and side wiring, brown color.

Manufacturer: Provide one of the following:

Arrow-Hart 5362
Bryant 5362
General Electric GE4108-1
Hubbell 5362
Pass & Seymour 5362


20 Ampere Duplex Convenience Receptacles for 120 Volt, Single Phase Service in Factory and Similar Areas: Two locking type, 2 pole, 3 wire, pin style receptacles with U-ground, rated 20 amperes, 125 volts, complete with 2-gang cast iron FS box and 2 single gang covers. Provide one matching plug for each receptacle furnished.

Manufacturer: Provide one of the following:

Russellstoll 8003U-1 with 8128U-l Plug

20 Ampere Duplex Ground Fault Circuit Interrupter (GFCI) Convenience Receptacles for 120 Volt, Single Phase Service: Two straight blade, 2 pole, 3 wire grounding, NEMA configuration 5-20R receptacles rated 20 amperes, 125 volts, NEMA performance standard, specification grade, with provisions for back and side wiring, brown color.

Units shall have a test and reset button on the face of the receptacles and visible indication of a tripped condition.
Units shall have line and load terminal screws such that connection to load terminals shall provide feed through ground fault protection for “downstream” receptacles and/or loads connected to these terminals.
All receptacles shall be Underwriters’ Laboratories, Listed under 498 Receptacle requirements and 943 Class A requirements.

Manufacturer: Provide one of the following:

Arrow-Hart GF5342
Bryant GFR53FT
Hubbell GF5362
Pass & Seymour 2091-S

DEVICE PLATES

Device Plates in Offices and Other Finished Areas: Stainless steel No. 302 finish.

Device Plates in Laboratory Areas: Stainless steel No. 302 finish.

Device Plates in Factory, Utility and Similar Areas: Zinc or cadmium plated steel.

Device Plates in Wet or Damp Areas and Outdoors: Weatherproof type. Provide spring-hinged gasketed covers on outdoor receptacles suitable for wet locations as defined in NEC Article 406.8.

Screws: Provide screws having a finish matching the plate.

PART 3 - EXECUTION

INSTALLATION

Mount equipment at locations indicated.

Install devices in outlet boxes as specified in Section 26 0533 "Raceways and Boxes for Electrical Systems" unless otherwise specified in this Section. Mount devices at uniform heights above the floor for various areas as indicated.


Install plates on flush mounted devices with all four edges in continuous contact with finished wall surfaces without the use of plaster mats or similar devices. Do not use plaster or similar fillings. Install plates vertically, unless otherwise noted, with an alignment tolerance of 1/16 inch.


END OF SECTION 26 2726


SECTION 26 2813 - FUSES

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.

SUMMARY

Section Includes:

Cartridge fuses rated 600-V ac and less for use in {control circuits, enclosed switches, panelboards, switchboards, enclosed controllers, and, motor-control centers}.

Related Sections:

Applicable sections of Division 26.

SUBMITTALS

Product Data:

Provide for each type of fuse specified.
Provide construction details, material, dimensions, descriptions of individual components.

SPARE FUSES

Furnish spare fuses that match products installed and that are packaged with protective covering for storage and identified with labels describing contents.

Fuses: Provide three (3) of each size and type installed on this project.

QUALITY ASSURANCE

Source Limitations: Obtain fuses, for use within a specific product or circuit, from single source from single manufacturer.

Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application.

Comply with NEMA FU 1 for cartridge fuses, and NFPA 70.

COORDINATION

Coordinate fuse ratings with utilization equipment nameplate limitations of maximum fuse size, with system short-circuit current levels and with coordination study.


PART 2 - PRODUCTS

MANUFACTURERS

Manufacturers: Provide one of the following:

Eaton (Bussman & Edison)
Littelfuse, Inc.
Mersen/Ferraz Shawmut

PART 3 - EXECUTION

EXAMINATION

Examine fuses before installation. Reject fuses that are moisture damaged or physically damaged.

Examine holders to receive fuses for compliance with installation tolerances and other conditions affecting performance, such as rejection features.

Examine utilization equipment nameplates and installation instructions. Install fuses of sizes and with characteristics appropriate for each piece of equipment.

Evaluate ambient temperatures to determine if fuse rating adjustment factors must be applied to fuse ratings.

Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected.

FUSE APPLICATIONS

Cartridge Fuses:

Feeders: Class RK1, time delay.
Motor Branch Circuits: Class RK5, time delay.

INSTALLATION

Install fuses in fusible devices. Arrange fuses so rating information is readable without removing fuse.

IDENTIFICATION

Install labels complying with requirements for identification specified in Section 260553 "Identification for Electrical Systems" and indicating fuse replacement information on inside door of each fused switch and adjacent to each fuse block, socket, and holder.

Install fuses where required with the ampacity shown on the drawings or where not indicated as follows:

Feeder Circuits: Sized to provide overcurrent protection of the conductors and to provide short circuit protection of the downstream equipment and shall have an ampacity equal to or less than the conductor ampacity.
Motor Branch Circuits: Sized to provide motor back-up overcurrent protection, short circuit protection and ground fault protection. Fuses shall be rated 125% of motor and full load amperes. Where motor service factors are greater than 1.0 increase the full load current accordingly. Where standard fuse size is not available, use next larger standard size fuse.
Fuses shall be selected to provide selective coordination.

END OF SECTION 26 2813


SECTION 26 2816 – ENCLOSED SWITCHES AND CIRCUIT BREAKERS

PART 1 - GENERAL

RELATED DOCUMENTS

Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to work of this Section.

SUMMARY

This Section specifies enclosed switches (safety switches) and circuit breakers as indicated and specified. Provide equipment supports and identification as specified.

Provide all labor, materials, and equipment as necessary to complete all work as indicated on the drawings, and as specified herein for a complete operating system.

Related Sections:

Applicable sections of Division 26 - Electrical

SUBMITTALS

General: Submit the following according to Conditions of the Contract and Division 01 Specification Sections.

Submit Shop Drawings and complete product data on each of the following:

Enclosed safety switches

PART 2 - PRODUCTS

HEAVY DUTY SAFETY SWITCHES

Only heavy duty "HD" safety switches shall be permitted.

Any safety switch installed in the field that does not meet the requirement of this code will be removed and replaced with an appropriate heavy duty and NEMA type safety switch.

The above requirements also refer to safety switches provided to the electrical contractors from other trades for installation.

SAFETY SWITCHES

General Description: Fusible or non-fusible as indicated, quick-make, quick-break, NEMA "HD" heavy duty visible blade type, horsepower rated in ratings up to 200 amperes at 600 volts and up to 400 amperes at 250 volts, in NEMA enclosures specified or as required for environment present. Furnish 3 pole, single throw switches unless otherwise indicated, with voltage and current ratings as indicated. Short circuit rating with fuses shall not be less than 50,000 A.I.C. Silver or cadmium plate all contact surfaces including fuse clips.

Interlocking: Equip switches with an external operating handle and interlock the operating handle with the cover door such that the cover door cannot be opened unless the switch is in the "off" position. Provide means for triple padlocking the operating handle in the "off" position such that when the operating handle is padlocked in the "off" position, the cover door cannot be opened and the switch cannot be closed. Equip switches with auxiliary contacts when such are indicated.


Fuse Clips: Standard rejection type for dual element cartridge type fuses as specified unless otherwise required.

Safety switches shall be furnished and installed as indicated on the drawing, with sizes and fusing as noted.

Safety switches inside of building shall be NEMA 1.

Safety switches mounted exterior of the building shall be NEMA type 3R.

Manufacturers: Provide one of the following:

Eaton Cutler-Hammer H-600
General Electric Type TH
Siemens
Square D Heavy Duty

PART 3 - EXECUTION

EQUIPMENT SUPPORTS

Mount all electrical equipment, not self supporting, including enclosed switches and circuit breakers securely to walls and columns with 1/4 inch minimum separation from same, and provide all necessary spacers, brackets, structural pieces, inserts, anchors and bolts for this purpose. For equipment fastened to exterior walls below grade, use 1/2” spacers. Safety switches and enclosed circuit breakers shall be mounted on separate structures from HVAC housings, duct work, exhaust fans, pump frames, etc.

Exterior Mounted Safety Switches: Provide unistrut backboard for safety swtich mounting consisting of at least two vertical unistrut posts and two horizontal unistrut posts. Bolt disconnect switch to backboard. Coordinate roof and or curb penetrations with Architectural Trades and Roofing Contractor. A single bolted unistrut vertical post is not acceptable.

EQUIPMENT IDENTIFICATION

Safety switches and enclosed circuit breakers shall be provided with name plate indicating equipment controlled by that particular device.

Provide identification on all electrical equipment installed. Refer to Section 260553.

TOUCH-UP PAINTING

On all equipment installed, touch-up paint all manufacturer's standard finished equipment surfaces damaged during construction to "as new" condition with original manufacturer's finish paint.


END OF SECTION 26 2816
