     Air-to-Water Heat Pump Pre-Purchase Specification  Herald Towers 50 West 34th Street New York, NY, 10001        SUBMITTED BY AMA Group 825 8th Avenue, FL 18 New York, NY, 10019   CONTACT Peter Harman Senior Associate PHarman@amagroupusa.com 212.404.5805     May 16, 2025 AMA Project No. J005-03-003    SECTION 236423.13 Ð AIR-TO-WATER HEAT PUMPS PART I - GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Section includes packaged, air-cooled, electric-motor-driven, scroll water heat pumps. 1.3 DEFINITIONS A. BAS: Building automation system. B. COP: Coefficient of performance. The ratio of the rate of heat removal to the rate of energy input using consistent units for any given set of rating conditions. C. DDC: Direct digital control. D. EER: Energy-efficiency ratio. The ratio of the cooling capacity given in Btu/h to the total power input given in watts at any given set of rating conditions. E. GFI: Ground fault interrupt. F. IPLV: Integrated part-load value. A single-number part-load efficiency figure of merit for a single heat pump calculated per the method defined by AHRI 550/590 and referenced to AHRI standard rating conditions. G. I/O: Input/output. H. kW/Ton: The ratio of total power input of the heat pump in kilowatts to the net refrigerating capacity in tons at any given set of rating conditions. I. NPLV: Nonstandard part-load value. A single number part-load efficiency figure of merit for a single heat pump calculated per the method defined by AHRI 550/590 and intended for operating conditions other than the AHRI standard rating conditions. J. SCCR: Short-circuit current rating. 1.4 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For each type of product. 1. Include refrigerant, rated capacities, operating characteristics, and furnished specialties and accessories. 2. Performance at AHRI standard conditions and at conditions indicated. 3. Performance at AHRI standard unloading conditions. 4. Minimum evaporator flow rate. 5. Refrigerant capacity of heat pump. 6. Oil capacity of heat pump. 7. Fluid capacity of evaporator. 8. Characteristics of safety relief valves. 9. Force and moment capacity of each piping connection. B. Shop Drawings: Complete set of manufacturer's prints of heat pump assemblies, control panels, sections and elevations, and unit isolation. Include the following: 1. Assembled unit dimensions. 2. Weight and load distribution. 3. Required clearances for maintenance and operation. 4. Size and location of piping and wiring connections. 5. Diagrams for power, signal, and control wiring. 1.5 INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS A. Coordination Drawings: 1. Plans, drawn to scale, on which the following items are shown and coordinated with each other, using input from installers of the items involved: a. Structural supports. b. Piping roughing-in requirements. c. Wiring roughing-in requirements, including spaces reserved for electrical equipment. d. Access requirements, including working clearances for mechanical controls and electrical equipment, and tube pull and service clearances. 2. Coordination drawings showing plan, section and elevation views, drawn to 3/8Ó scale. 3. Each view to show screened background with the following: a. Column grids, beams, columns, and concrete housekeeping pads. b. Layout with walls, floors, and roofs, including each room name and number. c. Equipment and products of other trades that are located in vicinity of heat pumps and part of final installation, such as plumbing systems. B. Certificates: For certification required in "Quality Assurance" Article. C. Installation instructions. D. Source quality-control reports. E. Startup service reports. F. Sample Warranty: For special warranty. 1.6 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Operation and Maintenance Data: For each heat pump to include in emergency, operation, and maintenance manuals.  B. Spare Parts List: Recommended spare parts list with quantity for each.  C. Touchup Paint Description: Detailed description of paint used in application of finish coat to allow for procurement of a matching paint. D. Instructional Videos: Including those that are prerecorded and those that are recorded during training. 1.7 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. AHRI Certification: Certify heat pump according to AHRI 590 certification program. 1.8 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Ship heat pumps from the factory fully charged with refrigerant and filled with oil. B. Package heat pump for export shipping as required. 1.9 WARRANTY A. Special Warranty: Manufacturer agrees to repair or replace components of heat pumps that fail in materials or workmanship within specified warranty period. 1. Extended warranties include, but are not limited to, the following: a. Entire Unit: 1-year parts & labor b. Compressors: 5-year parts & labor PART 2 - PRODUCTS 2.1 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. Site Altitude: Heat pump shall be suitable for altitude at which installed without affecting performance indicated. Make adjustments to affected heat pump components to account for site altitude. B. AHRI Rating: Rate heat pump performance according to requirements in AHRI 550/590. C. ASHRAE Compliance: ASHRAE 15 for safety code for mechanical refrigeration. D. ASHRAE/IES 90.1 Compliance: Applicable requirements in ASHRAE/IES 90.1, Section 6 - "Heating, Ventilating, and Air-Conditioning." E. ASME Compliance: Fabricate and stamp heat pump heat exchangers to comply with ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code. F. Comply with NFPA 70.  G. Comply with requirements of UL 1995, "Heating and Cooling Equipment," and include label by a qualified testing agency showing compliance. H. Outdoor Installations: 1. Heat pumps shall be suitable for outdoor installation indicated. Provide adequate weather protection to ensure reliable service life over a 25-year period with minimal degradation due to exposure to outdoor ambient conditions. 2. Heat pumps equipped to provide safe and stable operation while achieving performance indicated when operating at extreme outdoor temperatures encountered by the installation. Review historical weather database and provide equipment that can operate at extreme outdoor temperatures recorded over past 30-year period. 2.2 MANUFACTURERS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:  1. York 2. Aermec 3. Multistack 2.3 PACKAGED AIR TO WATER HEAT PUMP A. Description:  Factory-assembled and performance-tested water heat pump complete with base and frame, condenser casing, compressors, compressor motors and motor controllers, evaporator, condenser coils, condenser fans and motors, electrical power, controls, hydraulic header, and accessories. B. Cabinet: 1. Base:  Galvanized-steel base extending the perimeter of water chiller.  Secure frame, compressors, and evaporator to base to provide a single-piece unit. 2. Frame:  Rigid galvanized-steel frame secured to base and designed to support cabinet, condenser, control panel, and other chiller components not directly supported from base. 3. Casing:  Galvanized steel. 4. Finish:  Coat base, frame, and casing with rustproof polyester paint. C. Compressors: 1. Description:  Positive-displacement direct drive with hermetically sealed casing. 2. Each compressor provided with, crankcase oil heater, and suction strainer. 3. Operating Speed:  Nominal 3600 rpm for 60-Hz applications. 4. Capacity Control:  On-off compressor cycling 5. Oil Lubrication System:  Automatic pump with strainer, sight glass, filling connection, filter with magnetic plug, and initial oil charge. 6. Vibration Isolation:  Mount individual compressors on vibration isolators. 7. Compressors must be enclosed in acoustically insulated and weatherproof compartment.   D. Refrigeration: 1. Refrigerant R-454b.  a. Classified as Safety Group A2L according to ASHRAE 34. Approved by EPA for global warming potential and use case 2. Refrigerant Compatibility:  Parts exposed to refrigerants shall be fully compatible with refrigerants, and pressure components shall be rated for refrigerant pressures. 3. Refrigerant Circuit:  Each circuit shall include a thermal-expansion valve, refrigerant charging connections, a hot-gas muffler, compressor suction and discharge shutoff valves, a liquid-line shutoff valve, a replaceable-core filter-dryer, a sight glass with moisture indicator, a liquid-line solenoid valve, and an insulated suction line. 4. Each unit shall have two refrigeration circuits.   E. Refrigerant-to-Water Heat Exchanger (Hot Water & Chilled Water Production): 1. Brazed Plate: a. Direct-expansion, single-pass, brazed-plate design. b. Type 316 stainless-steel construction. c. Heat exchanger shall have two independent refrigerant circuits, one water circuit  d. Code Compliance:  Tested and stamped according to ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code. 2. Heater:  Factory-installed and -wired electric heater with integral controls designed to protect the heat exchanger. 3. Heat exchanger shall be provided with a factory installed inlet strainer. F. Refrigerant-to-Water Heat Exchanger (Heat Recovery Hot Water)   1. Brazed Plate: a. Direct-expansion, single-pass, brazed-plate design. b. Type 316 stainless-steel construction. c. (1) Heat exchanger to be provided for each independent refrigeration circuits. Each heat exchanger shall tie into the single hot water circuit.  d. Code Compliance: Tested and stamped according to ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code.  2. Heater: Factory-installed and wired electric heater with integral controls designed to protect the heat exchanger.  G. Air-to-Refrigerant Heat Exchanger:  1. Construction shall be aluminum. 2. Fans:  Direct-drive propeller type with statically and dynamically balanced fan blades, arranged for vertical air discharge. 3. Fan Motors:  Inverter driven totally enclosed nonventilating (TENV) or totally enclosed air over (TEAO) enclosure, with permanently lubricated bearings, and having built-in overcurrent- and thermal-overload protection. H. Noise level:  1. Sound Power level from the chiller, in accordance with EN ISO 9614-2, shall be less than 89.4 dB (A) for standard static fans  I. Defrost 1. The units must include intelligent defrost. This allows the unit to go in defrost only when is needed, avoiding unnecessary defrost cycles. This shall be achieved by monitoring the suction pressure decay and the OAT. 2. The unit must have the ability to defrost one circuit at the time. 3. Timed defrost is not allowed. 4. Heat pumps performance and efficiency should take into consideration of defrost cycles. 5. Defrost cycle should not usually be less than 2 minutes and not more than 6 minutes. 6. During defrost cycle, condenser fan should be off. 7. Defrost will start only when external air temperature is less than 50F . 8. Low pressure threshold on the coil should be less than 5.2 bar/75.42 Psi. 9. When the pressure variations between clean and uncleaned coil is 0.6 bar/8.70 psi, defrost will start automatically. 10. Minimum time between two defrost should be greater than 15 minutes  J. Electrical Power: 1. Factory-installed and -wired switches, motor controllers, transformers, and other electrical devices necessary shall provide a single-point field power connection to each Unit. 2. House in a unit-mounted, NEMA 250, Type 3R enclosure with hinged access door with lock and key or padlock and key. 3. Electrical enclosure shall be mounted on hinges in order to maximize serviceability to components located behind. 4. Wiring shall be numbered and color-coded to match wiring diagram. 5. Install factory wiring outside of an enclosure in a raceway. 6. Field power interface shall be heavy-duty, nonfused disconnect switch. 7. Provide each motor with overcurrent protection. 8. Overload relay sized according to UL 1995, or an integral component of water chiller control microprocessor. 9. Phase-Failure and Undervoltage:  Solid-state sensing with adjustable settings. 10. Transformer:  Unit-mounted transformer with primary and secondary fuses and sized with enough capacity to operate controls 11. Control Relays:  Auxiliary and adjustable time-delay relays. 12. Indicate the following for water chiller electrical power supply: a. Current, phase to phase, for all three phases. b. Voltage, phase to phase and phase to neutral for all three phases. c. Three-phase real power (kilowatts). d. Three-phase reactive power (kilovolt amperes reactive). e. Power factor. f. Running log of total power versus time (kilowatt hours). g. Fault log, with time and date of each. K. Controls: 1. Each unit shall be provided with a microprocessor-based controller compatible for communication via BACnet. 2. Enclosure:  Share enclosure with electrical power devices or provide a separate enclosure of matching construction. 3. Operator Interface:  Keypad or pressure-sensitive touch screen.  Multiple-character, backlit, liquid-crystal display or light-emitting diodes.  Display the following: a. Date and time. b. Operating or alarm status. c. Operating hours. d. Outside-air temperature if required for chilled-water reset. e. Temperature and pressure of operating set points. f. Entering and leaving temperatures of water. g. Refrigerant pressures in evaporator and condenser. h. Saturation temperature in evaporator and condenser. i. No cooling load condition. j. Elapsed time meter (compressor run status). k. Antirecycling timer status. l. Percent of maximum motor amperage. m. Current-limit set point. n. Number of compressor starts. 4. Control Functions: a. Manual or automatic startup and shutdown time schedule. b. Entering and leaving water temperatures, control set points, and motor load limit.   c. Current limit and demand limit. d. Antirecycling timer. e. Automatic lead-lag switching. 5. Manual-Reset Safety Controls:  The following conditions shall shut down water chiller and require manual reset: a. Low evaporator pressure or high condenser pressure. b. Low water temperature. c. Refrigerant high pressure. d. High or low oil pressure. e. High oil temperature. f. Loss of water flow. g. Control device failure. L. Insulation: 1. Material:  Closed-cell, flexible elastomeric, thermal insulation  2. Thickness: 1/3 Inch 3. Factory-applied insulation over cold surfaces of water chiller components. a. Adhesive:  As recommended by insulation manufacturer and applied to 100 percent of insulation contact surface.  Seal seams and joints. 4. Apply protective coating to exposed surfaces of insulation. M. Water Circuit and Modularity  1. Modules must require clearance on only two sides in order to perform all service functions.  2. Each module must be capable of being completely isolated electrically and hydraulically without impacting the operation of the rest of the modules on the set. 3. Headers shall be provided with grooved connections between modules.  Headers shall be factory installed and incorporated into the frame of the chiller. 4. Shut off valves shall be provided between refrigerant-to-water heat exchanger and header of each module 5. 4-Pipe Configuration: a. Dedicated chilled water header that connects to the primary refrigerant to water heat exchanger.  b. Dedicated hot water header that connects to the primary refrigerant to water heat exchanger and heat recovery heat exchangers.  c. Unit to be equipped with all factory mounted and controlled valves that are necessary to direct water to each header.  6. Water circuit to be rated for 85 PSI operating pressure  2.4 SOURCE QUALITY CONTROL A. Heat pump shall be manufactured in an ISO 9001 certified facility.   B. Each unit shall be factory performance tested on a third-party certified test stand to ensure proper operation, full load efficiency and full load capacity.  Test reports shall be made available to owner and engineer upon request.  AHRI certification does not preclude chiller from performance test requirement.  1. Functional Test  a. Pre-charge unit with nitrogen and test for leakage  b. Establish a vacuum to remove all gas and to eliminate moisture inside the refrigerant circuit c. Charge the unit with refrigerant d. Connect the evaporator and condensers inlet and outlet water connections to the testing room plant e. Set the water flow to the design flow rate f. Connect power to the unit and carry out test of voltage and frequency on the electrical panel g. Program the microprocessor control with basic working parameters h. Set up the valves and trim the refrigerant charge i. Start up each compressor and test electrical data j. Set up all the pressure switches k. Calibrate the various temperature and pressure probes on the circuit   2. Performance Test a. Test the following alarms on the microprocessor through run test 1) High pressure alarm 2) Low pressure alarm 3) Compressors alarm 4) Evaporator freeze alarm b. Test probe failures c. Run the chiller in the production climatic test chamber at full load conditions at AHRI conditions.  d. Record the performance data on the test report sheet and provide a copy to engineer and owner. e. Each compressor circuit will be run separately.  3. Sound Compliance: Chiller sound power levels shall be rated according to ISO 9614-2 and sound pressure levels rated to ISO 3744 standards.  If alterations are made to a standard chiller to comply with the sound requirements, the manufacturer must provide a sound performance test in a certified facility.  4. Products shall be designed, tested, rated and certified in accordance with, and installed in compliance with applicable sections of the following standards and codes:  a. AHRI 550/590 and 551/591-water chilling packages using the vapor compression cycle b. AHRI 370-sound rating of large outdoor refrigerating and air-conditioning equipment c. ANSI/ASHRAE 34-Number designation and safety classification of refrigerants d. ASHRAE 90.2-Energy Standard of Building except Low-rise Residential Buildings e. ANSI/NFPA 70-National Electrical Code(N.E.C) f. Confirm to Intertek Testing Services for construction of chiller and provide ETL listed Mark. g. The unit should have IP24 protection level for outdoor installation. PART 3 - EXECUTION 3.1 EXAMINATION A. Before heat pump installation, examine roughing-in for equipment support, anchor-bolt sizes and locations, piping, controls, and electrical connections to verify actual locations, sizes, and other conditions affecting water chiller performance, maintenance, and operations. 1. Heat pump locations indicated on Drawings are approximate. Determine exact locations before roughing-in for piping, controls, and electrical connections. B. Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected. 3.2 HEAT PUMP INSTALLATION A. Coordinate sizes and locations of bases with actual equipment provided. Cast anchor-bolt inserts into concrete bases. B. Coordinate sizes, locations, and anchoring attachments of structural-steel support structures with actual equipment provided. 1. Comply with requirements for vibration isolation devices specified in Section 230548.13 "Vibration Controls for HVAC." C. Maintain manufacturer's recommended clearances for service and maintenance. D. Maintain clearances required by governing code. E. Heat pump manufacturer's factory-trained service personnel shall charge water chiller with refrigerant if not factory charged and fill with oil if not factory installed. F. Install separate devices furnished by manufacturer and not factory installed. 1. Heat pumps shipped in multiple major assemblies shall be field assembled by heat pump manufacturer's factory-trained service personnel. G. Manufacturer to provide factory certified technician for following: 1. Equipment Startup 2. BMS Integration Assistance 3. Commissioning Assistance 4. Module Assembly Inspection  3.3 PIPING CONNECTIONS A. Comply with requirements in Section 232113 "Hydronic Piping" and Section 232116 "Hydronic Piping Specialties." Drawings indicate general arrangement of piping, fittings, and specialties. B. Where installing piping adjacent to heat pumps, allow space for service and maintenance. Where heat pump piping and associated trim is not passing through / integral to the unit, piping and trim shall be factory installed and mounted to heat pump base. 3.4 ELECTRICAL POWER CONNECTIONS A. Connect wiring according to Section 260519 "Low-Voltage Electrical Power Conductors and Cables." B. Ground equipment according to Section 260526 "Grounding and Bonding for Electrical Systems." C. Provide nameplate for each electrical connection indicating electrical equipment designation and circuit number feeding connection. Nameplate shall be laminated phenolic layers of black with engraved white letters at least 1/2 inch high. Locate nameplate where easily visible. 3.5 CONTROLS CONNECTIONS A. Install control and electrical power wiring to field-mounted control devices. B. Connect control wiring between heat pumps and other equipment to interlock operation as required to provide a complete and functioning system. C. Connect control wiring between heat pump control interface and DDC system for remote monitoring and control of chillers. Comply with requirements in Section 230923 "Direct Digital Control (DDC) System for HVAC." D. Provide nameplate on face of chiller control panel indicating control equipment designation serving heat pump and the I/O point designation for each control connection. Nameplate shall be laminated phenolic layers of black with engraved white letters at least 1/2 inch high. 3.6 STARTUP SERVICE A. Engage a factory-authorized service representative to perform startup service. B. Inspect field-assembled components, equipment installation, and piping and electrical connections for proper assemblies, installations, and connections. C. Complete installation and startup checks according to manufacturer's written instructions and perform the following: 1. Verify that refrigerant charge is sufficient and heat pump has been leak tested. 2. Verify that thermometers and gages are installed. 3. Operate heat pump for run-in period. 4. Check bearing lubrication and oil levels. 5. Verify proper motor rotation. 6. Verify static deflection of vibration isolators, including deflection during water chiller startup and shutdown. 7. Verify and record performance of water flow and low-temperature interlocks. 8. Verify and record performance of heat pump protection devices. 9. Test and adjust controls and safeties. Replace damaged or malfunctioning controls and equipment. D. Visually inspect heat pump for damage before starting. Repair or replace damaged components, including insulation. Do not start chiller until damage that is detrimental to operation has been corrected. E. Prepare a written startup report that records results of tests and inspections. 3.7 DEMONSTRATION A. Engage a factory-authorized service representative to train Owner's maintenance personnel to adjust, operate, and maintain heat pumps. Video record the training sessions and provide electronic copy to Owner. 1. Instructor shall be factory trained and certified. 2. Provide not less than eight hours of training. 3. Train personnel in operation and maintenance and to obtain maximum efficiency in plant operation. 4. Provide instructional videos showing general operation and maintenance that are coordinated with operation and maintenance manuals. 5. Obtain Owner sign-off that training is complete. 6. Owner training shall be held at Project site.  END OF SECTION 236423.13  