SECTION 23 0000 -HVAC GENERAL PART 1 -GENERAL 1.01 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS A. Refer to Division 1 -General Requirements and any and all Supplementary or Special Requirements, all of which apply to work described in Division 23 -HVAC as if written in full herein. B. The scope of work described in these Specifications and/or indicated on the Drawings shall include the furnishing of all materials, equipment, appurtenances, accessories, connections, labor, etc. required and/or necessary to completely install, clean, inspect, adjust, test, balance and leave in safe and proper operating condition all HVAC systems. All HVAC work shall be accomplished by workmen skilled in the various trades involved. C. The Drawings and Specifications are complementary to each other and what is called for by one shall be as binding as if called for by both. If a discrepancy exists between the Drawings and Specifications, the higher implied cost shall be included in the bid, and the Architect shall be notified of the discrepancy in writing. D. All work performed under this specification shall be accomplished in accordance with the requirements and provisions of the following sections 1. Section 01 81 13 Sustainable Design Requirements 2. Section 01 81 16 Facility Environmental Requirements 3. Section 01 81 19 Indoor Air Quality Requirements 4. Section 01 91 00 Commissioning 1.02 CODES AND STANDARDS A. All HVAC work shall conform to all ordinances and regulations of the City, County and State where the work will take place, including the requirements of all authorities having jurisdiction. The following codes, standards and references shall be observed as a minimum: 1. The 2018 International Codes 2. The 2018 International Mechanical Code 3. State Amendments to the Code 4. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standards and Guidelines 5. Local and State Fire Marshal requirements 6. Local Building and Inspection Department requirements 7. Local adopted codes, standards, ordinances (including noise ordinances), or amendments 8. American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Engineers, Inc. (ASHRAE) a. Standard 90.1-2010– Energy Standard for Buildings Except Low-Rise Residential Buildings b. Standard 62.1-2010– Ventilation for Acceptable Indoor Air Quality c. Standard 55-2010 – Thermal Environmental Conditions for Human Occupancy d. Other Standards and Guidelines as applicable 9. Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors’ National Association, Inc. (SMACNA) Manuals 10. Air Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Institute (AHRI) 11. Air Conditioning Contractors of America (ACCA) 12. American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) 13. Underwriters Laboratories Inc. (UL) 14. Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) 15. LEED Version 4. B. If Code or other requirements exceed the provisions shown on the Contract Documents, the Engineer shall be notified in writing. Where requirements of the Contract Documents exceed Code requirements, work shall be furnished and installed in accordance with the Contract Documents. Any work done contrary to these requirements shall be removed and replaced at the Contractor’s expense. Jordan & Skala Engineers HVAC GENERAL 23 0000 -1 1.03 NOISE CRITERIA DESIGN GOALS A. Mechanical equipment, air distribution systems and devices shall be designed to not exceed the following noise criteria (NC) levels: 1. Public Space Areas:  NC <35 2. Utility/All Other Areas:  NC <40 3. Residential areas:  NC <30 4. Open Office areas: NC<40 5. Restaurants: NC<45 6. Retail: NC<45 . 1.04 MISCELLANEOUS DEFINITIONS A. Terms: The following definitions of terms supplement those of the Division 01-General Requirements and are applicable to Division 23 –Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning (HVAC): 1. Contractor: As used herein the term shall mean “the person or entity referred to throughout the Contract Documents as if singular in number. The Contractor shall designate in writing a representative who shall have express authority to bind the Contractor with respect to all matters under this Contract. The term “Contractor” means the Contractor or the Contractor’s authorized representative.” 2. Furnish: As used herein shall mean “supply and deliver to Project site, unload and inspect for damage.” 3. Install: As used herein the term shall mean “to place in position for service, temporarily store, unpack, assemble, erect, apply, place, protect, clean, start up, and make ready for use.” 4. Owner: As used herein the term shall mean “the person or entity identified as such and is referred to throughout the Contract Documents as if singular in number.  The Owner shall designate in writing a representative who shall have express authority to bind the Owner with respect to all matters requiring the Owner’s approval or authorization. The term “Owner” means the Owner or the Owner’s authorized representative.” 5. Product: As used herein shall include materials, systems, and/or equipment, machinery, components, and fixtures forming the work result. Not materials or equipment used for preparation, fabrication, conveying, or erection and not incorporated into the work result. Products may be new, never before used, or re.used materials or equipment. 6. Provide: As used herein shall mean“furnish andinstall, complete and ready for the intended use.” 7. The Work: As used herein the term shall mean “the construction and services required by the Contract Documents, whether completed or partially completed, and includes all other labor, materials, equipment, and services provided or to be provided by the Contractor to fulfill the Contractor’s obligations. The Work may constitute the whole or a part of the Project. 8. Experienced: When usedwith anentity or individual, “experienced” means having successfully completed a minimum of five previous projects similar in nature, size, and extent to this Project; being familiar with special requirements indicated; and having complied with requirements of authorities having jurisdiction. 1.05 WORK INCLUDE The HVAC Systems installed and work performed under this Division of the Specifications shall include, but not necessarily be limited to: A. Airside Systems 1. Equipment: including fans, unitary air conditioners, air handling units, fan-coil units, make-up air units, dedicated outdoor air units, furnaces, split systems, etc. 2. Ductwork and Accessories: including sheet metal, duct-board, kitchen hood and dishwasher exhausts, flexible ductwork, fire and smoke dampers, access doors, etc. Jordan & Skala Engineers HVAC GENERAL 23 0000 -2 3. Air Terminal Devices: including powered induction units, variable air volume valves, etc. 4. Air Distribution Devices:  including louvers, registers, grilles, diffusers, etc. B. Refrigerant and Water Systems 1. Equipment: including pumps, air separators, expansion tanks, water chillers, cooling towers, filtration systems, chemical treatment, heat exchangers, boilers and space heating water heaters, feed-water systems, condensing units, etc. 2. Piping, Tubing and Accessories: including pipe, refrigerant tubing, valves, solenoids, thermal expansion valves, strainers, air vents, pipe and equipment drains, condensate drains, expansion devices, etc. C. Equipment, Ductwork and Piping Supports 1. Equipment Mounts: including roof curbs, concrete housekeeping pads, equipment rails, miscellaneous steel, etc. 2. Hangers and Support Devices: including inserts, hanger rods, strut channel, cross-bracing, anchor bolts, pipe anchors, restraints, etc. 3. Vibration Isolation and seismic restraint: including inertia bases, flexible couplings, expansion devices, snubbers, springs, waffle pads, seismic restraints, etc. D. Insulation 1. Ductwork Insulation: including exterior duct wrap, internal duct liner, fire wrap, etc. 2. Piping and Equipment Insulation: including preformed, board and wrap E. Miscellaneous HVAC Equipment: Unit heaters, wall heaters, roof hoods, heat tracing, etc. F. Fuel oil storage and distribution systems G. Automatic Temperature Controls 1. Decentralized: including all thermostats, control dampers, control valves, programmable controllers, line and low-voltage wiring, smoke detectors, pressure sensors, gas sensors, control logic, etc. 2. Building Automation System (BAS)/Facility Management System (FMS): same as above but networked to a central human-machine computer interface, including all software and programming, display graphics, etc. H. Labor and Equipment: including project management, supervision, tradesmen, lifts, fork-trucks, cranes, scaffolding, saws, wrenches, etc. I. Equipment and Valve Identification J. Start-up and Commissioning K. Demonstration and Owner Training L. Testing, Adjusting and Balancing 1.06 ENGINEER’S DRAWINGS A. The locations, arrangement and extent of equipment, devices, ductwork, piping, and other appurtenances related to the installation of the HVAC work shown on the Drawings are approximate and define the intent of the design. The Contractor shall not scale Engineer’s Drawings, but shall refer to the architectural drawings for exact dimensions of building components. Should a conflict exist between the architectural and engineering drawings regarding dimensions and scale, the Contractor shall notify the Architect of the discrepancy. B. Materials, equipment or labor not indicated but which can be reasonably inferred to be necessary for a complete installation shall be provided. Drawings and Specifications do not undertake to indicate every item of material, equipment, or labor required to produce a complete and properly operating installation. 1.07 EQUIPMENT, MATERIALS AND BID BASIS A. Manufacturers’ names, model numbers, etc. cited on the Drawings and in the Specifications are for the purpose of describing type, capacity, function and quality of equipment and materials required. All project design and coordination between disciplines has been performed as if the named manufacturer and specific piece of equipment will be provided to the project by the Contractor. B. Alternate equipment and/or materials other than that named on the Drawings and in the Specifications may be proposed for use, but all equipment and materials shall conform Jordan & Skala Engineers HVAC GENERAL 23 0000 -3 entirely to the specified base items. Proposed alternate equipment shall be substantially equal in size, weight, construction and capacity. Alternate equipment and materials shall be submitted only as full equivalent to the equipment and materials specified, with sufficient supportive documentation and technical literature to demonstrate quality, performance, and workmanship without doubt or question. Requests for prior approval of alternate products shall be made at least ten (10) days prior to the bid date and as required by Division 1 -General Requirements. The Engineer shall consider the use of the alternate equipment based on the supportive documentation made available to him, and shall approve or disapprove any proposed alternates. Major exceptions to these specifications will be considered sufficient cause for rejection of the submittal. The decision of the Engineer shall, in all cases, be final. 1. The ten (10) day prior approval submittal shall include a Compliance Review of the Specifications and Addenda (if any). The Compliance Review shall be paragraph.by-paragraph review of the Specifications with the following information; “C”, “D” or “E” marked in the margin of the original Specifications and any subsequent Addenda. 2. “C”:  Comply with no exceptions. 3. “D”: Comply with nodeviations. For each and every deviation, provide a numbered footnote with reasons for the proposed deviation and how the intent of the Specification can be satisfied. 4. “E”: Exception, does not comply. For each and every exception, provide a numbered footnote with reasons and possible alternatives. 5. Manufacturer shall provide complete paragraph-by-paragraph compliance document detailing unit conformance to the specification. The Engineer will not review the proposal for equipment compliance. Unless a deviation or exception is specifically noted in the Compliance Review, it is assumed that the bidder is in complete compliance with the plans and specifications. Deviations or exceptions taken in cover letters, subsidiary documents, by omission or by contradiction do not release the bidder from being in complete compliance, unless the exception or deviation has been specifically noted in the Compliance Review. The bidder may submit the latest state-of-the-art components in lieu of specified components at no additional cost, where latest state-of-the-art components perform better than what is specified. All deviations from the specifications must be approved by the Architect/Engineer and the Owner. C. The Contractor shall coordinate the installation of all HVAC equipment proposed for use in this project with all building trades (architectural, structural, electrical, etc.). Coordination shall be accomplished prior to, and shall be reflected in, the equipment submittals for approval. When the Contractor requests substitution of alternate equipment, it is with the knowledge that he shall be responsible for any and all costs required by the substitution, including necessary engineering and construction revisions in his or any other contract or trade to satisfy the design intent shown on the Plans and described in the Specifications. D. All materials exposed within HVAC plenums shall have a flame-spread index of not more than 25 and a smoke-developed rating index of not more than 50 unless otherwise allowed by code. 1.08 SUBMITTALS A. The Contractor shall prepare, submit and obtain Engineer’s review of all manufacturers’ data on the HVAC equipment and systems prior to ordering, purchasing or installing any equipment or materials. Shop drawings shall be submitted electronically in a portable document format (pdf). An acceptable alternate would be to submit six (6) hard copies of the complete submittal, five of which will be reviewed and returned. Submittals shall be as described in Division 01 -General Requirements. Prior to submitting to the engineer, the contractor shall review and subsequently place his approval stamp on the shop drawings. Submittals shall be transmitted simultaneously in a single .zip file or, in the case of hard copies, three-ring ring binders with the associated specification sections cited and the items submitted clearly identified. Submittals lacking the contractor’s approval stamp and partial submittals will be returned without review. Submittals, as a minimum, shall include: Jordan & Skala Engineers HVAC GENERAL 23 0000 -4 1. All HVAC items scheduled on the Drawings 2. Equipment arrangement, ductwork and piping drawings. Contractor drawings shall be prepared at a minimum scale of 1/8" = 1'-0". A scale of 1/4" = 1'-0" scale is preferred. Drawings shall be indicative of actual equipment purchased and shall show all offsets, transitions, fittings, dampers, valves, hanger locations, etc. Sections are required in spatially tight areas (e.g. kitchens, laundries, central plants, mechanical rooms, etc.) The following will guide the Contractor as to minimum drawing detail required: a. Clearly indicate top and bottom of duct and pipe elevations. All elevations shall be coordinated as to not conflict with structural, plumbing, electrical and architectural trades. b. Indicate all offsets (both vertical and horizontal). c. Indicate graphically all duct and pipe joints and their lengths. d. Submit duct and pipe-work fabrication schedule indicating duct size range with minimum duct material gauges, pipe schedule being used, duct and pipe connection joint types, section lengths, duct reinforcement type and spacing, etc. e. Indicate graphically all ductwork to be fabricated with internal duct liner. f. Indicate all insulation for ductwork and piping. g. Indicate all dampers and valves as shown on design documents and called for in the specifications. h. Indicate all flexible connectors where required by specifications and notes. 3. Flexible ductwork, duct-board, insulation and linings 4. Ventilation controllers, dampers, louvers, air distribution devices, wall terminations (wall caps), roof terminations (roof caps, hoods, jacks, etc.) 5. Manufacturer’s cut sheets of all piping and tubing materials 6. Where split systems are used in a “long line application,” submit manufacturer’s refrigerant line set routing drawings and engineered calculations supporting installed line lengths and recommended suction and liquid line sizes (deviations in the installed lengths and sizes shall be recorded on the as-built drawings and coordinated with the manufacturer to reconfirm that long line guidelines are being met). a. Identify and provide cut sheets of any and all accessories required to make the system complete, functional and reliable. b. Any split system with 75 feet of separation between the outdoor unit and the indoor unit requires that the contractor obtain a warranty approval letter from the equipment manufacturer certifying the long line length distances shown on the submitted shop drawings are acceptable. c. Refer to the EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION -COMMON REQUIREMENTS paragraph below. 7. Refrigerant type and charge (lbs.) for each item of equipment utilizing refrigerant. 8. AHRI Certificates 9. Valves, thermometers, pressure gauges 10. Thermal expansion/contraction piping system design including complete layout drawings indicating anchor loads, points, and method of structural support.  11. Roof curbs, equipment supports, hanger systems, vibration isolators, seismic restraints 12. Control equipment, systems and diagrams 13. Test and balance reports B. All submittal approvals required by any code or enforcement authority, insurance underwriter, etc. shall be obtained prior to being submitted to the Engineer. C. Review of submittals by the Engineer does not relieve the Contractor from responsibility for complying with all requirements of the Contract Documents. Furthermore, it shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to coordinate the requirements (roof penetrations, wall penetrations, floor penetrations, curbs, electrical, etc.) of all approved equipment with the other trades and disciplines. Jordan & Skala Engineers HVAC GENERAL 23 0000 -5 D. All submittals shall be identified by the equipment mark or tag identification numbers shown on the Contract Drawings. Each individual submittal item shall be marked to show which specification section pertains to the item. E. The Contractor shall provide a written statement confirming coordination of voltage requirements for all HVAC equipment requiring an electrical connection. Statement shall bear the names and signatures of the HVAC and electrical contractors. A photocopied reproduction of the below statement is acceptable. VOLTAGE COORDINATION STATEMENT This statement is to confirm that the voltages of the equipment provided under this specification have been coordinated with the Electrical Drawings, as well as with the Electrical Contractor. HVAC Contractor:  Project Manager Name:  Project Manager Signature/Date: Electrical Contractor:  Project Manager Name:  Project Manager Signature/Date: F. Provide Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) or letter from manufacturer certifying the VOC content for each adhesive, sealant, paint and coating. G. VOC Content: Submit adhesive and sealants product information or MSDS showing VOC Content information for all applicable products specified under this section. All applicable products in this section must meet low VOC content as specified by LEED Specification Section 01 81 13 Sustainable Design Requirements. 1.09 PERMITS A. The Contractor shall obtain all permits and inspections required for the installation of the HVAC work and pay all charges incident thereto. He shall deliver copies of all certificates of permit and inspection to the Architect. 1.10 COORDINATION OF TRADES A. The Contractor shall give full cooperation to other trades, and shall furnish all information necessary to permit the work of all trades to be installed satisfactorily and with the least possible interference or delay. B. Piping and other HVAC equipment shall not be installed without first coordinating the installation of same with other trades. The Contractor, at his own expense, shall relocate all uncoordinated ductwork, piping and other HVAC equipment installed should they interfere with the proper installation and mounting of electrical, plumbing equipment, ceilings and other architectural or structural finishes. C. The Contractor shall coordinate the elevations of all ductwork, piping and equipment above ceilings and in exposed areas with the work of all other disciplines prior to installation. D. In areas where more than one trade is required to use common openings in beams, joists, chases, shafts and sleeves for the passage of conduits, raceways, piping, ductwork and other materials, the Contractor must coordinate the positions of all piping and equipment to be furnished under this section so that all items including the materials and equipment of other trades may be accommodated within the space available. E. The HVAC Contractor shall confirm that his work does not interfere with the clearances required for finished columns, pilasters, partitions, walls or other architectural or structural elements as shown on the Contract Documents. F. Work that is installed under this Contract which interferes with the architectural design or building structure shall be removed and relocated as required at no additional cost to the Contract. G. Coordinate power and fire alarm requirements of all combination fire/smoke dampers and smoke dampers with the electrical contractor. H. The General Contractor shall coordinate service access paths for roof-mounted equipment requiring routine maintenance. Provide code compliant galvanized steel crossing structure (e.g. stairs with handrails, ladders, etc.) for any obstruction (ductwork, piping, etc.) that exceeds 1'-6" in height x 1'-6" in width. In addition, refer to Part 3 below -EQUIPMENT Jordan & Skala Engineers HVAC GENERAL 23 0000 -6 INSTALLATION -COMMON REQUIREMENTS. Details of such crossings shall be included with piping and ductwork layout and coordination drawings. I. Coordinate with the roof system used so that a minimum of 8" of the roof curb is above the finished roof for flashing purposes. The top of the curb shall be level and the slope of the roof shall be compensated for by the curb. 1.11 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE MANUALS A. The Contractor shall prepare a minimum of two (2) instruction manuals, one of which shall besubmittedto theArchitect for theEngineer’s review. Manuals shall describe installation, operation and maintenance of all HVAC equipment and shall include copies of control schematics, sequences of operation, function and operations of all components, as well as the Contractor’s name, address, and telephone number. Manuals shall also contain one copy of all manufacturers’ drawings, pamphlets, data, parts lists, and instruction manual for each piece of equipment. Upon approval, one copy shall be delivered to the Owner; one copy shall be kept by the Contractor. The pamphlets and drawings are to be neatly bound in (a) 3-ring binder(s). In addition to the hard copy, provide electronic files (PDF format) of the manuals. 1.12 AS-BUILT DRAWINGS A. The Contractor shall maintain a record of all changes in the work from that shown in the Contract Documents. The record shall be by red-line mark-up on the most current set of Engineer’s Drawings kept in the field office. After all work is completed, the Contractor shall prepare a set of “as-built” reproducible drawings of similar type and quality as the Engineer’s Drawings. As an alternate to hard copy drawings, provide electronic files (PDF format) of the as-built conditions. As-built drawings shall accurately depict actual final arrangement of all HVAC items.  As-built drawings shall be delivered to the Architect. 1.13 WARRANTY A. All equipment furnished and installed under this Contract shall be provided with the manufacturer’s standard warranty unless otherwise noted. B. All reciprocating, rotary and scroll air conditioning compressors shall be provided with an extended 5-year parts warranty. C. The Contractor shall make good all defects in material, equipment, or workmanship disclosed within a period of one (1) year from date of building acceptance by the Owner. The phrase “make good”shall mean to furnish promptly, without charge, all work necessary to remedy the defects to the satisfaction of the Engineer. 1.14 COMMISSIONING A. This project requires commissioning per the requirements of the (city, code, and/or specific energy program). Commissioning shall be by applicable contractor and either the engineering firm of record or a 3rd party commissioning agent. Refer to the commissioning (specifications, plan, checklists, and/or additional on drawing notes) for additional information. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.01 GENERAL A. All equipment, materials, accessories, etc. used shall be new and of current production unless specified otherwise. Equipment not specified in the Engineer’s Drawings shall be suitable for the intended use and shall be subject to approval by the Engineer. B. All equipment, products and materials shall be free of defects and shall be constructed to operate in a safe manner without excessive noise, vibration, leakage, or wear. C. All equipment shall bear the inspection Label of Underwriters Laboratories Inc. D. All equipment and material for similar applications or systems shall be provided from the same manufacturer unless noted otherwise. E. The VOC content of all products in this section shall not exceed the VOC limits established in Section 01 81 13 Sustainable Design Requirements. F. VOC Content: Submit adhesive and sealants product information or MSDS showing VOC Content information for all applicable products specified under this section. All applicable products in this section must meet low VOC content as specified by LEED Specification Section 01 81 13 Sustainable Design Requirements. Jordan & Skala Engineers HVAC GENERAL 23 0000 -7 2.02 ELECTRICAL WORK A. Except as otherwise specified or noted, electrical equipment used for HVAC systems shall be as specified herein. B. Motor controls, system controls, starters, disconnects, pilot lights, push buttons, etc. shall be furnished by the HVAC Contractor compatible with the apparatus that it operates.  Electrical equipment shall be wired for the voltage shown on the Electrical Drawings. C. The Contractor shall be responsible for coordinating and furnishing equipment of voltage shown on the electrical documents. D. Electric motors shall be NEMA Premium Efficiency open drip proof type. Motors shall meet NEMA MG1 Table 12-12 of EISA, 2010. Motors shall be selected with a minimum of 15% safety factor greater than the fan brake/horsepower (e.g. 4.75 BHP would require a nominal 7. HP motor). The motor service factor shall not be used as part of the safety factor. All motors shall have thermal overload protection. Motors shall be capable of operating at + 10% of the design voltage without voiding the manufacturer’s warranty. Motors that drive equipment that will run continuously shall be IEC 60034-1 continuous duty rated. E. Motors controlled by a variable frequency drive (VFD) shall be inverter duty motors designed according to the requirements of NEMA MG 1, Part 31, “Definite Purpose, Inverter Fed Motors” and shall be compatible with the particular manufacturer’s drive that is used. F. Starters for motors . HP and smaller shall be manual type, and for . HP and larger, shall be magnetic type. Starters shall be minimum size 0, combination type (with disconnect and lockable handle) with molded case circuit breaker.  Starters for motors with remote or automatic control shall be magnetic. Relays, interlocks and auxiliary contacts shall be provided as specified and required. G. Magnetic motor starters shall be across-the-line, full voltage, non-reversing type unless otherwise indicated on the Drawings or specified herein. Starters for motors 75 HP and greater shall be solid state, reduced voltage type. H. Motor controls shall be either “Hand-Off-Auto” switches or “On-Off” push buttons with one indicating light. “Hand-Off-Auto” switches shall be provided for automatically controlled apparatus. I. Motor starters that are not an integral part of HVAC equipment shall be installed in conformance with Division 26 -Electrical Requirements. J. All “loose” disconnects and starters shall be installed by Division 26. K. Power wiring to disconnects, starters, and equipment shall be provided and installed by Division 26. All equipment requiring electrical power shall be provided with a disconnect switch at each piece of equipment. Coordinate switch type (fused or non-fused) with equipment characteristics, manufacturer’s recommendations and the electrical drawings. L. Provide all system controls and associated control and interlock wiring for complete and operable systems. 120 volt and higher wiring shall be MC cable or in conduit in accordance with local codes and the materials and installation requirements of Division 26 -Electrical. M. Coordinate power and fire alarm requirements of all combination fire/smoke dampers and smoke dampers with the electrical contractor. N. All starters and variable frequency drives shall be labeled on the face of the device with a semi-rigid plastic laminate nameplate with 1" high white letters on a black background securely affixed to the equipment. The label shall indicate equipment served (equipment tag used on the Drawings).  Labels shall be furnished and installed by the Contractor. O. All starters for 3-phase equipment shall have overload devices in each phase. P. Wiring diagrams shall be furnished by the Contractor. Q. Coordinate with the electrical drawings for the required short circuit current rating of the panelboard serving multi-motor and combination-load equipment. The equipment nameplate shall bear a rating of no less than the panelboard rating. R. Acceptable manufacturers shall be General Electric, Square D, Eaton, Siemens and Allen Bradley. 2.03 AIR FILTERS A. All filters shall be U.L. 900 classified Jordan & Skala Engineers HVAC GENERAL 23 0000 -8 B. Filters shall be pleated disposable type (MERV 6 minimum) unless specified otherwise. C. Filters installed at outside air system shall be MERV 13 per LEED. D. Install one set of new filters in air handling equipment during construction and install a new set prior to test and balance. Fan powered induction units shall have a temporary roll filter media installed at the plenum air inlet during construction. Remove temporary filter media prior to test and balance. Clean and vacuum all inlets prior to test and balance. E. Temporary roll filter media shall be provided at the inlets to all air handling equipment operated during construction. Remove temporary filter media prior to test and balance. Clean and vacuum all inlets prior to test and balance. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.01 GENERAL A. All equipment and materials shall be completely installed, adjusted, and fully operational with all accessories and connections. B. Equipment, piping, ductwork, etc. shall fit into the spaces provided in the building and shall be installed at such time and in such a manner as to avoid damage and as required by the job progress. In general, ductwork, piping, equipment, etc. shall be installed tight to structure above. The Contractor shall coordinate work with other trades and locate work described herein to avoid interferences with structural, electrical and architectural work.  Shop drawings shall clearly indicate any conflicts with other trades. Equipment, accessories and similar items requiring normal servicing or maintenance shall be accessible. C. The Engineer reserves the right to direct the removal of any item which, in his opinion, does not present an orderly and reasonably neat or workmanlike appearance. Such removal and replacement shall be done when directed by the Engineer and without additional cost to the Owner. D. Listed mounting heights are to the finished bottom of the device unless otherwise noted. E. All work shall be designed and installed to comply with the requirements for the seismic design category and use group for the area in which the building is constructed. F. Expansion in piping systems shall be compensated for using u-bends, z-bends or expansion joints as indicated. U-bends (loops) and z-bends shall be complete with pipe guides and anchors. Expansion compensation in piping risers over 100 feet in length shall be made with engineered systems; either spring type isolators and central anchor system (by Mason Industries) or flexible hose expansion loops (Metraloop as manufactured by the Metraflex Company). Refer to specification Section 23 21 13 for additional requirements. 3.02 STORAGE AND PROTECTION OF STORED MATERIALS A. During construction, all equipment shall be properly protected against damage, defacing and freezing with shipping cartons, plastic sheeting, shipping covers, etc. B. All open ends of piping and equipment shall be sealed with nipples and caps, plugs, and test plugs until final connection to system is made. C. All equipment, piping and ductwork shall be protected to prevent entrance of foreign matter and debris by covering exposed openings during construction. D. Handle and store materials in accordance with manufacturer’s and supplier’s recommendations and in a manner to prevent damage to materials during storage and handling.  Replace damaged materials. E. Equipment and materials shall not be installed until such time as the environmental conditions of the job site are suitable to protect the equipment or materials. Equipment or materials damaged, or which are subjected to these elements, are unacceptable and shall be removed from the premises and replaced. 3.03 PROTECTION OF HVAC SYSTEMS IN OCCUPIED BUILDINGS A. Protect equipment and air distribution systems as outlined in SMACNA’s IAQ Guidelines for Occupied Buildings Under Construction, latest edition. 3.04 BUILDING DRY-OUT DURING CONSTRUCTIO A. HVAC equipment shall not be used to dehumidify the building interior and dry-out construction materials. The HVAC system does not have the capacity to perform a building dry-out. The HVAC equipment shall not be operated until the building is completely dried-in and construction is substantially complete. Jordan & Skala Engineers HVAC GENERAL 23 0000 -9 B. Coordinate with the general contractor to provide industrial grade desiccant type dehumidifiers to perform building dry-out. Propane or diesel space heaters are not acceptable as the combustion process adds moisture to the air. 3.05 CUTTING AND PATCHING A. The work shall include all cutting and patching required as part of the HVAC installation. Refer to Division 1 -General Requirements. 3.06 CONCRETE WORK A. Construct curbs, pads and similar supports for equipment where required. B. Provide 4" (min.) thick housekeeping pads for all floor mounted equipment, extending 6" beyond the area occupied by the equipment.  Dowel pads to structural slab. C. Perform concrete work in accordance with applicable portions of Division 3 -Concrete. Minimum compressive strength of concrete shall be same as specified for slabs on grade. D. Mix and install grout for HVAC equipment base bearing surfaces and anchors. Provide forms as necessary and place grout to completely fill equipment bases. 3.07 EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION -COMMON REQUIREMENTS A. Install equipment to allow maximum possible headroom unless specific mounting heights are indicated. B. Install equipment level and plumb, parallel and perpendicular to other building systems and components in exposed interior spaces, unless otherwise indicated. C. Install HVAC equipment to facilitate service, maintenance, and repair or replacement of components. Connect equipment for ease of disconnecting, with minimum interference to other installations.  Extend grease fittings to accessible locations. D. Install equipment to allow right-of-way for piping to be installed with the required slope. E. For roof and attic mounted equipment requiring routine maintenance, allow for an unobstructed path from the roof/attic service entry point to the equipment. The path area shall be a minimum of 6'-0" high by 3'-0" wide. F. Split system outdoor unit equipment has been shown indicating matched systems of the indoor unit with its associated outdoor unit. While the location of the outdoor units are approximate, the importance of unit locations relative to the refrigerant line set penetration through a wall or roof is critical for the project. Prior to ordering equipment, the contractor shall carefully coordinate the line set routing and requirements with the split system manufacturer to insure installation guidelines, especially for long line applications, are being followed. Refrigerant line sets shall be routed to reduce the system total equivalent length and minimize system capacity losses due to elbows, fittings, valves, etc. After the coordinated routing drawings have been approved and certified by the split system manufacturer, they shall be submitted for review along with the equipment and any required accessories. During installation, the contractor is responsible for keeping as-built refrigerant piping installation drawings noting any deviations to the proposed routing. Deviations that may affect proper system operation or performance shall be reviewed by the manufacturer immediately and corrective action implemented as required. 3.08 EQUIPMENT SUPPORTS A. Major equipment supports (structural steel frames, framed structural slab and wall openings, etc.) shall be furnished and installed by others; however, the HVAC work shall include furnishing and installation of all miscellaneous equipment supports, structural members, rods, clamps and hangers required to provide adequate support of all HVAC equipment. B. Unless otherwise shown on the Drawings, all HVAC equipment, piping, and accessories shall be installed level, square, and plumb. C. All equipment, piping, etc. supported by structural bar joists shall be supported only by the top chord of the joists.  Hangers shall not be attached to the bottom chord of any joists. 3.09 PIPE AND DUCTWORK PENETRATIONS A. Sleeves shall be installed in all masonry or concrete walls, floors, roofs, etc. for pipe and ductwork penetrations. Sleeves for pipe shall be schedule 40 black steel pipe. Sleeves for ductwork shall be 20-gauge galvanized steel. Ductwork sleeves shall be sized to provide Jordan & Skala Engineers HVAC GENERAL 23 0000 -10 a minimum of ." clearance between the sleeve and duct. For insulated ducts, the clearance shall be between the sleeve and the insulation. B. As far as possible, all pipe and ductwork penetrations shall be provided for at the time of masonry or concrete construction. Where drilling is required, only core drills shall be used. Star drills shall not be used. C. Piping entering the building below grade and passing through cast-in-place concrete walls or floors shall be fitted with a mechanical rubber seal inside of a 12" long schedule 40 steel pipe sleeve with integral water-stop. The sleeve shall be sized to house the mechanical rubber seal and carrier pipe. The mechanical rubber seal shall be constructed of EPDM and stainless-steel hardware and provide a hydrostatic seal of up to 20 psi and up to 40 feet of head. Products shall be Metraseal as manufactured by The Metraflex Company or equal by Link-Seal. D. All pipes passing through masonry walls shall be fitted with schedule 40 steel pipe sleeves.  Sleeves shall be of the first possible size larger than the outside diameter of the pipe to be sleeved or the insulation jacket on covered pipes. Sleeves shall be flush on either side of the masonry walls. E. All pipes passing through the masonry floors shall be fitted with schedule 40 steel pipe sleeves of the first size larger than the pipe to be sleeved. All sleeves on these floors shall extend 1" above the finished floor and 1" below the bottom of the slab. All pipe sleeves through the floors of the mechanical room shall be 16-gauge galvanized steel extending 2" above the finished floor. After the pipes are installed, the annular space shall be packed with fiberglass to ." from the top of the sleeves, and then topped off with a ." depth of sealant such as PRC-Rubber Caulk 7000 or other such approved sealant. F. All pipes penetrating walls or floors of any construction shall be installed with escutcheon plates on both sides of the penetration securely fastened to the wall or floor with a clamping device for holding the escutcheon in position. G. In exposed areas, escutcheon plates shall be chrome plated. All escutcheon plates shall be sized to completely conceal the penetration. H. Ductwork penetrating walls or floors of any material shall be installed with closure plates on both sides of the penetration. I. All pipe and duct penetrations of fire, smoke, or fire and smoke-rated assemblies shall be fire-stopped as required to retain the integrity of the UL-rated assembly. Fire barrier products shall be as manufactured by Tremco, Hilti, 3M, Metacaulk, Nelson, STI or approved equal.  Refer to Division 7 -Thermal and Moisture Protection. J. Ensure that materials used for fire-stopping, caulking, sealing, pest/rodent proofing, etc. are compatible with the piping material used. Some materials are known to react with certain piping systems causing premature failure. 3.10 FLASHING A. All piping and ductwork penetrating roofs shall be flashed in an approved manner, shall be watertight, and shall conform to the requirements detailed in Division 7 -Thermal and Moisture Protection. 3.11 EQUIPMENT LABELING A. All HVAC equipment shall be labeled. This shall include all central plant, air handling or air conditioning equipment, air terminals, and other similar and miscellaneous equipment. B. Labels for air terminals or other devices shall be located for optimum visibility through access panel or removed ceiling tiles. C. Equipment labeling shall be one of the following, unless noted or specified otherwise: 1. Permanently attached plastic laminated signs with 1" high lettering 2. Stencil painted identification, 2" high letters, with standard fiberboard stencils and standard black (or other appropriate color) exterior stencil enamel 3.12 CLEANING A. At all times, the premises shall be kept reasonably clean and free of undue amounts of waste, trash and debris by periodic cleaning and removal. After completion, all foreign material, trash and other debris shall be removed from the job site. Jordan & Skala Engineers HVAC GENERAL 23 0000 -11 B. After all equipment has been installed, but prior to testing and balancing, all equipment, piping, ductwork, etc. shall be thoroughly cleaned both inside and out. C. All water piping shall be chemically flushed and cleaned prior to circulating water through equipment. D. After cleaning, filters shall be installed where required and all systems shall be tested and balanced. E. After testing and balancing and just prior to Owner review and acceptance, all systems shall be finally cleaned and left ready for use. 3.13 PAINTING A. Painting will be done under Division 9 -Painting except as otherwise noted, but the HVAC Contractor shall leave all surfaces of work free of rust, dirt and grease. B. The HVAC Contractor shall touch-up any equipment scratched in shipment or during installation to match the original finish. Touch-up painting of HVAC equipment shall be part of the HVAC work. C. Any visible ductwork through grilles, registers and diffusers shall be painted flat black.  D. Provide one coat of rust preventive primer on all new structural steel supports and new ferrous surfaces not galvanized, including insulated and non-insulated HVAC piping. Rust preventive painting shall be part of the HVAC work. Rust preventive paint shall be “Rust Destroyer” by Advanced Protective Products, Inc., Fair Lawn, NJ, (800) RUST-007. Product shall have a 5-year warranty when applied directly over rust. Clean and prepare surface per manufacturer’s recommendations. E. All painting and coating shall match the original finish and shall conform to the requirements detailed in Division 9 -Finishes. F. Do not paint over equipment nameplates, nonferrous hardware, accessories or trim. 3.14 PRESSURE TESTING A. Unless otherwise specified herein, all HVAC piping shall be tested as required by Code to 1. times the rated system pressure or 100 psig, whichever is greater. Care shall be taken to isolate all equipment not suitable for this test pressure by installing pipe caps or blank flanges at the equipment connections. All valves and fittings shall be tested under pressure. 3.15 PERFORMANCE AND DEMONSTRATION TESTS A. All testing and demonstration of any and all HVAC systems required for acceptance by any authorities having jurisdiction shall be included as part of the HVAC work. This shall include the furnishing of any and all testing equipment, smoke generation devices, and any other required equipment or accessories, and all necessary labor required to perform any required tests or demonstrations. The Contractor shall coordinate and verify all devices, equipment and sequence of testing and/or events with such authorities having jurisdiction. The Contractor shall perform a minimum of two (2) satisfactory preliminary tests or demonstrations prior to any formal tests and/or demonstrations for any code authorities and shall give a minimum of five (5) days advance notice to the Engineer of any and all preliminary tests and/or demonstrations, indicating the date and time of such tests. B. For testing and demonstration of smoke control systems, the requirements in paragraph 3.14.A apply. In addition, coordinate with the owner/operator for witnessing of formal testing. 3.16 TRAINING A. Upon completion of the work, the Contractor shall conduct operation and training session(s) for the Owner’s key operating personnel. These sessions shall be of sufficient length and duration to adequately explain the design intent and proper operating and maintenance techniques for all HVAC equipment and systems. After these sessions are completed, the Contractor shall provide a copy of a signed statement by the Owner that his personnel are thoroughly familiar with and capable of operating all HVAC equipment and systems. END OF SECTION 23 0000 Jordan & Skala Engineers HVAC GENERAL 23 0000 -12 SECTION 23 0300 -ROOF CURBS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.01 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS A. All work specified herein shall be accomplished in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section 23 00 00 -HVAC General. 1.02 WORK INCLUDED A. Receipt, unloading, handling, proper storage and protection from damage of all materials. B. Layout and coordination of work with other trades. C. The work included under this section shall include all labor, materials, accessories, services and equipment necessary to furnish and install curbs complete as indicated on the Drawings and as specified herein. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.01 GENERAL A. Prefabricated curbs for HVAC equipment located on the roof shall be manufactured by Canfab, Micrometl, Pate, Thycurb, Roof Products & Systems (RPS), Inc., or approved equal. 2.02 ROOF CURBS A. Curbs shall be RPS Series ARC with integral fiber cant fabricated to match any roof slope and have a minimum height of 12". Coordinate with the roof system used so that a minimum of 8" of the curb is above the finished roof for flashing purposes. The top of the curb shall be level and the slope of the roof shall be compensated for by the curb. B. Curbs shall be a minimum of 18-gauge galvanized steel construction (or as deemed necessary by the curb manufacturer to support unit load) with fully mitered and welded corners and self-flashing without cant. The curb shall not sag more than 1" in 240" + or .when supporting the unit at the corners of curb only. The curb shall be internally reinforced with angle iron, factory insulated with 1.", 3 lb./ft3 density fiberglass insulation, and shall be complete with factory installed pressure treated wood nailers. Coordinate sizes to match frames provided by others. When the project is located within 5 miles of a sea coast, curbs shall be of aluminum construction. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.01 INSTALLATION A. Installation shall be in strict accordance with the manufacturer’s printed instructions and as detailed on the Drawings. Curb manufacturer shall coordinate with HVAC and General Contractor. END OF SECTION 23 0300 Jordan & Skala Engineers ROOF CURBS 23 0300 -1 SECTION 23 0548 -NOISE AND VIBRATION CONTROL AND WIND RESTRAINT PART 1 -GENERAL 1.01 DESCRIPTION A. Furnish and install vibration control devices, materials, and related items. Perform all work as shown on the Drawings and as specified herein to provide complete vibration isolation systems in proper working order. 1.02 MATERIAL AND EQUIPMENT A. Vibration isolation mounts shall be supplied by one of the following approved manufacturers: 1. Amber/Booth Co. (Houston, TX) A.B. 2. Mason Industries, Inc. (Hauppauge, NY) M.I. 3. Kinetics Noise Control, Inc. (Dublin, OH) K.N.C. 4. Vibration Eliminator Co., Inc. (Copiague, NY) V.E. 5. Vibration Mountings & Controls, Inc. (Butler, NJ) V.M.&C 6. Vibro-Acoustics (Markham, ON, Canada) V.A. B. Unless otherwise specified, supply only new equipment, parts and materials. C. Substitutions of equal equipment beyond the alternatives listed will be permitted only with the written permission of the Architect. Accompany each request for acceptance of substitute equipment with manufacturer’s certified data proving the equivalence of the proposed substitute in quality and performance. The Architect shall be the final judge of the validity of the data submitted. D. Unless otherwise approved by the Architect, field-installed vibration isolation equipment shall be furnished by a single manufacturer or his authorized representative, who shall also be responsible for all work specified in this section to be performed by the manufacturer. 1.03 REQUESTS FOR CHANGE A. Any requests for changes to the specifications must be submitted in writing at least ten (10) days prior to bid closing. Approval will be given through a written addendum. Refer to Division 01 for additional requirements. 1.04 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Coordinate the size, location, and special requirements of vibration isolation equipment and systems with other trades. Coordinate plan dimensions with size of housekeeping pads. B. Provide vibration isolators of the appropriate sizes, with the proper loading to meet the specified deflection requirements. C. Supply and install any incidental materials such as mounting brackets, attachments and other accessories as may be needed to meet the requirements stated herein, even if not expressly specified or shown on the Drawings, without claim for additional payment. D. Verify correctness of equipment model numbers and conformance of each component with manufacturer’s specifications. E. Should any rotating equipment cause excessive noise or vibration when properly installed on the specified isolators, the Contractor shall be responsible for rebalancing, realignment, or other remedial work required reducing noise and vibration levels. Excessive is defined as exceeding the manufacturer’s specifications for the unit in question. F. Upon completion of the work, the Architect or Architect’s representative shall inspect the installation and shall inform the installing contractor of any further work that must be completed. Make all adjustments as directed by the Architect that result from the final inspection.  This work shall be done before vibration isolation systems are accepted. 1.05 SUBMITTALS A. Refer to related sections elsewhere for procedural instructions for submittals. B. Before ordering any products, submit shop drawings of the items listed below. The shop drawings must be complete when submitted and must be presented in a clear, easily Jordan & Skala Engineers CONTROL, SEISMIC AND WIND RESTRAINT NOISE AND VIBRATION 23 0548 -1 understood form. Incomplete or unclear presentation of shop drawings may be reason for rejection. 1. A complete description of products to be supplied, including product data, dimensions, specifications, and installation instructions. 2. Detailed selection data for each vibration isolator supporting equipment, including: a. The equipment identification mark; b. The isolator type; c. The actual load; d. The static deflection expected under the actual load; e. The specified minimum static deflection. 3. Steel rails, steel base frames, and concrete inertia bases showing all steel work, reinforcing, vibration isolator mounting attachment method, and location of equipment attachment bolts. 4. Special details necessary to convey complete understanding of the work to be performed. C. Submission of samples may be requested for each type of vibration isolation device. After approval, samples will be returned for installation at the job if requested. All costs associated with submission of samples shall be borne by the Contractor. 1.06 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS A. Design isolators for equipment installed outdoors to provide adequate restraint to withstand the force as required by code to any exposed surface of the isolated equipment.  Isolators for outdoor equipment shall have bolt holes for attachment to equipment and to supports.  The vibration isolation Vendor shall submit verifying shear and over turning calculations, for their product and equipment installation arrangement, stamped by a licensed Professional Engineer. The design and supply of miscellaneous support steel above and below isolators will not be the responsibility of the vibration isolation manufacturer. 1.07 VIBRATION ISOLATION AND WIND RESTRAINT A. Scope 1. Provide isolators, flexible connections, and equipment bases for all rotating, piston driven, or vibrating equipment. 2. Guarantee specified isolation system deflections. 3. Provide installation instructions, drawings, and field supervision to ensure proper installation and performance of all items specified in this section. 4. Design, furnish, and install attachment devices, and anchor bolts, that are required for wind compliance for all equipment, apparatus piping, conduit and raceways, ductwork, and other components of the specified systems required by codes and standards. “Attachment Devices” are devices such as double-sided beam clamps, concrete inserts, and attachment plates that serve to secure the supported device into the structure. 5. Provide wind restraint types as described. If the item to be restrained is not listed, select appropriate restraint and submit for approval. B. Definitions 1. “Attachment Devices” are devices such as double-sided beam clamps, concrete inserts, and attachment plates that serve to secure the supported device to the structure. 2. “Positive Attachment” is defined as a support location with a cast-in or wedge type expansion anchor, a double-sided beam clamp, or a welded or through bolted connection to the structure. 3. “Transverse Bracing” Restraint(s) applied to limit motion perpendicular or angular to the centerline of the pipe, duct, or conduit. 4. “Longitudinal Bracing” Restraint(s) applied to limit motion perpendicular or angular to the centerline of the pipe, duct, conduit, etc. 5. Life Safety Systems Jordan & Skala Engineers CONTROL, SEISMIC AND WIND RESTRAINT NOISE AND VIBRATION 23 0548 -2 a. All systems involved with fire protection, including sprinkler piping, fire pumps, jockey pumps, fire pump control panels, service water supply piping, water tanks, and fire dampers. b. All systems involved with and/or connected to emergency power supply, including all generators, transfer switches, transformers and all circuits to fire equipment. c. All systems involved with and/or connected to emergency power supply, including all generators, transfer switches, transformers and all circuits to fire protection, smoke evacuation and/or emergency lighting systems. C. Reference Codes and Standards 1. 2018 International Building Code 2. Structural references for the specific project listed 3. Wind forces for all rooftop equipment D. Submittal Data Requirements 1. Submittals a. Catalog cuts or data sheets on specific products utilized, which detail compliance with the specification. Reference “TYPE” as per “PRODUCTS” section of this specification. 2. Shop Drawings a. Show base construction for equipment; include dimensions, weights, structural member sizes and support point locations. b. Indicate isolation devices selected with complete dimensional and deflection data before condition is accepted for installation. c. Calculate thrust for fan heads (axial and centrifugal fans) to determine whether thrust restraints are required. E. Wind Certification and Analysis 1. Wind restraint calculations shall be provided for all connections of equipment to the structure. All performance of products (such as: strut, cable, anchors, clips, etc.) associated with restraints shallbe supported with manufacturer’s data sheets or certified calculations. 2. Calculations to support wind restraint design shall be stamped by a registered professional engineer with at least five years of wind design experience. 3. Table elevations refer to the structural point of attachment of the equipment support system (i.e., use floor slab for floor supported equipment and the elevation of the slab above for suspended equipment). 4. Analysis shall indicate calculated dead loads, derived loads and materials utilized for connections to equipment and structure. Analysis shall detail anchoring methods, bolt diameter, embedment and/or weld length. 5. Certification and analysis report shall be submitted along with other HVAC submittals. F. Manufacturer Inspection 1. Upon completion of installation of all vibration isolation devices, a certification report prepared by the manufacturer shall be submitted in writing to the Contractor indicating that all systems are installed properly and in compliance with the specifications. The report must identify those areas that require corrective measures or certify that none exist. Any field coordination type changes to the originally submitted vibration restraint designs must be clearly defined and detailed in this report. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.01 VIBRATION ISOLATOR TYPES A. General Jordan & Skala Engineers CONTROL, SEISMIC AND WIND RESTRAINT NOISE AND VIBRATION 23 0548 -3 1. All metal parts installed out-of-doors shall be corrosion resistant after fabrication. Galvanizing shall meet ASTM Salt Spray Test Standards and Federal Test Standard No. 14. 2. Isolators installed out-of-doors shall have base plates with bolt holes for fastening the isolators to the support members. 3. Isolator types are scheduled to establish minimum standards.  At the Contractor’s option, labor-saving accessories can be an integral part of isolators supplied to provide initial lift of equipment to operating height, hold piping at fixed elevations during installation and initial system filling operations, and similar installation advantages. Accessories and vibration restraint features must not degrade the isolation performance of the isolators. 4. Static deflection of isolators shall be as provided in the EXECUTION section and as shown on the Drawings. All static deflections stated are the minimum acceptable deflection for the mounts under actual load. Isolators selected solely on the basis of rated deflections are not acceptable and will be disapproved. B. Type FSN (Floor Spring and Neoprene) 1. FSN isolators shall be freestanding and laterally stable without any housing.  Spring diameter shall be not less than 0.8 of the compressed height of the spring at the rated load.  Springs shall have a minimum additional travel-to-solid equal to 50% of the rated deflection. Springs shall be so designed that the ratio of horizontal stiffness to vertical stiffness is approximately 1. Mounts shall have leveling bolts. 2. The spring element in the isolator shall be set in a neoprene cup and have a steel washer or a flat surface in contact with the neoprene to distribute the load evenly over the bearing surface of the neoprene. Alternatively, each isolator shall be mounted on a Type NP isolator. If the NP isolator is used, a rectangular bearing plate of appropriate size shall be provided to load the pad uniformly within the manufacturer’s recommended range. If the isolator is to be fastened to the building and the NP isolator is used, the holes in the isolator base plate shall be oversized and GROMMETS shall be provided for each base plate bolt hole. 3. If the basic spring isolator has a neoprene friction pad on its base and an NP isolator is to be added to the base, a galvanized steel, stainless steel or aluminum bearing plate shall be used between the friction pad and the NP isolator. If the isolator is outdoors, bearing plates shall not be made of galvanized steel. The NP isolator, bearing plate and friction pad shall be permanently adhered to one another and to the bottom of the isolator base plate. 4. Type FSN isolators shall be one of the following products with the appropriate neoprene pad (if used) selected from Type NP or approved equal: a. Type SW A.B. b. Type SLF M.I. c. Type FDS K.N.C. d. Type OST V.E. e. Series AC V.M.&C. f. Type CM V.A. C. Type FSNTL (Floor Spring and Neoprene Travel Limited) 1. FSNTL isolators shall be freestanding and laterally stable without any housing. Spring diameter shall be not less than 0.8 of the compressed height of the spring at the rated load. Spring shall have a minimum additional travel-to-solid equal to 50% of the rated deflection. Springs shall be so designed that the ratio of horizontal stiffness to vertical stiffness is approximately 1. Mounts shall have leveling bolts. Mounts shall have vertical travel limit stops to control extension when weight is removed. The travel limit stops shall be capable of serving as blocking during erection of the equipment. A minimum clearance of 1/4" shall be Jordan & Skala Engineers CONTROL, SEISMIC AND WIND RESTRAINT NOISE AND VIBRATION 23 0548 -4 maintained around restraining bolts and between the limit stops and the spring to avoid interference with the spring action. 2. The spring element in the isolator shall be set in a neoprene cup and have a steel washer or a flat surface in contact with the neoprene to distribute the load evenly over the bearing surface of the neoprene. Alternatively, each isolator shall be mounted on a Type NP isolator. If the NP isolator is used, a rectangular bearing plate of appropriate size shall be provided to load the pad uniformly within the manufacturer’s recommended range. If the isolator is to be fastened to the building and the NP isolator is used, the holes in the isolator base plate shall be oversized and GROMMETS shall be provided for each base plate bolt hole. 3. If the basic spring isolator has a neoprene friction pad on its base and an NP isolator is to be added to the base, a galvanized steel, stainless steel or aluminum bearing plate shall be used between the friction pad and the NP isolator. If the isolator is outdoors, bearing plates shall not be made of galvanized steel. The NP isolator, bearing plate and friction pad shall be permanently adhered to one another and to the bottom of the isolator base plate. 4. Type FSNTL isolators shall be one of the following products, with the appropriate neoprene pad (if used) selected from Type NP or approved equal: a. Type CT A.B. b. Type SLR M.I. c. Type FLS K.N.C. d. Type KW V.E. e. Series AWR V.M.&C. f. Type CSR V.A. For regions where G force values exceed 0.5G (wind) a stronger (more rigid housing) isolator is required. g. Type SCSR V.A. D. Type FN (Floor Neoprene) 1. NP isolators shall be neoprene-in-shear type with steel reinforced top and base. All metal surfaces shall be covered with neoprene. The top and bottom surfaces shall be ribbed. Bolt holes shall be provided in the base and the top shall have a threaded fastener. The mounts shall include leveling bolts that may be rigidly connected to the equipment. 2. Type FN isolators shall be one of the following products or approved equal: a. Type RVD A.B. b. Type ND M.I. c. Type RD K.N.C. d. Type D44 V.E. e. Series RD V.M.&C. f. Type RD V.A. E. Type FNC (Floor Neoprene Constrained) 1. FNC isolators shall incorporate bridge-bearing neoprene elements with all-directional restraint. The mount shall consist of a ductile iron casting containing two (2) separated and opposing molded neoprene elements. The elements shall prevent the central threaded sleeve and attachment bolt from contacting the casting during normal operation. Bolt holes shall be provided in the base and the top shall have a threaded fastener. 2. Type FNC isolators shall be one of the following products or approved equal: a. Type BR M.I. b. Series RSM V.M.&C. c. Type SRD V.A. F. Type PCF (Pre-compressed Fiberglass) Jordan & Skala Engineers CONTROL, SEISMIC AND WIND RESTRAINT NOISE AND VIBRATION 23 0548 -5 1. PCF isolator blocks shall be made of molded inorganic glass fiber that is individually coated and sealed with an impervious elastomeric membrane. Fiberglass shall be severely overloaded during the manufacturing process to stabilize the material into a product that is permanent and has consistent, predictable dynamic properties. 2. Type PCF isolators shall be one of the following products or approved equal: a. Type KIP K.N.C. G. Type NP (Neoprene Pad) 1. NP isolators shall be one layer of 5/16" to 3/8" thick ribbed or waffled neoprene.  The pads shall be sized so that they will be loaded within the manufacturer’s recommended range. 2. Type NP isolators shall be one of the following products or approved equal: a. Type NR A.B. b. Type W M.I. c. Type NPS K.N.C. d. Type 200N V.E. e. Series Maxi-Flex V.M.&C. f. Type N V.A. H. Type DNP (Double Neoprene Pad) 1. DNP isolators shall be formed by two layers of 1/4" to 3/8" thick ribbed or waffled neoprene, separated by a galvanized steel, stainless steel, or aluminum plate. If the isolator is outdoors, the plate shall not be made of galvanized steel. These layers shall be permanently adhered together. The pads shall be sized so that they will be loaded within the manufacturer’s recommended range. 2. Type DNP isolators shall be formed from one of the following products or approved equal: a. Type NR A.B. b. Type WSW M.I. c. Type NPS K.N.C. d. Type 200N (Multilayers) V.E. e. Series Maxi-Flex V.M.&C. f. Type NP V.A. I. Type HSN (Hanger Spring and Neoprene) 1. HSN isolators shall consist of a freestanding and laterally stable steel spring and a neoprene element in series, contained within a steel housing.  Spring diameters and hanger housing lower hole sizes shall be large enough to permit the hanger rod to swing through a 30 degrees arc before contacting the housing. Alternatively, other provisions shall be made to allow for a 30 degrees arc of movement of the bottom hanger rod without contacting the isolator housing. Spring diameter shall be not less than 0.8 of the compressed height of the spring at the rated load. Spring elements shall have a minimum additional travel-to-solid equal to 50% of the rated deflection. The neoprene element shall be designed to have a 0.3" minimum static deflection. The deflection of both the spring element and the neoprene element shall be included in determining the overall deflection of Type HSN isolators. 2. A pre-compressed glass fiber element may be substituted for the neoprene element. 3. Type HSN isolators shall be one of the following products or approved equal: a. Type BSR-A A.B. b. Type 30N M.I. c. Type SRH or SFH K.N.C. d. Type SNRC V.E. Jordan & Skala Engineers CONTROL, SEISMIC AND WIND RESTRAINT NOISE AND VIBRATION 23 0548 -6 e. Type RSH 30A or RSHSC V.M.&C. f. Type SHR V.A. J. Type HN (Hanger Neoprene) 1. HN isolators shall consist of a neoprene-in-shear element contained within a steel housing. A neoprene neck bushing shall be provided where the hanger rod passes through the hanger housing to prevent the rod from contacting the hanger housing. 2. A pre-compressed glass fiber element may be substituted for the neoprene element. 3. Type HN isolators shall be one of the following products or approved equal: a. Type BRD-A A.B. b. Type HD M.I. c. Type RH or FH K.N.C. d. Type 3C V.E. e. Type RHD V.M.&C. f. Type NH V.A. 2.02 EQUIPMENT BASES A. Type BSR (Base -Steel Rail) 1. Steel rail bases shall consist of structural steel sections sized to provide a rigid beam that will not twist, deform, or deflect in any manner that will negatively affect the supported equipment or the vibration isolation mounts. Rail bases shall include mounting brackets for attachment of vibration isolators. 2. Type BSR bases shall be one of the following products or approved equal: a. Type C or CIS A.B. b. Type R or ICS M.I. c. Type KRB or KFB K.N.C. d. Type CS V.E. e. Type WFR V.M.&C. f. Type CS V.A. B. Type BSF (Base -Steel Frame) 1. Steel frame bases shall consist of structural steel sections sized, spaced, and connected to form a rigid base which will not twist, rack, deform, or deflect in any manner which will negatively affect the supported equipment, or the vibration isolation mounts. Frames shall be adequately sized to support basic equipment units and motors plus any associated pipe elbow supports, duct elbow supports, electrical control elements, or other components closely related and requiring resilient support in order to prevent vibration transfer to the building structure. The depth of steel frame bases shall be at least 1/10 the longest dimension of the base supported between isolators and not less than 6". The base footprint shall be large enough to provide stability for supported equipment. 2. Frame bases shall include side mounting brackets for attachment to vibration isolators. Mounting brackets shall be located on the sides of the base that are parallel to the axis of rotation of the supported equipment. 3. Type BSF bases shall be one of the following products or approved equal: a. Type WX A.B. b. Type WFSL M.I. c. Type SFB K.N.C. d. Type HB V.E. e. Series WFB V.M.&C. f. Type CIS V.A. C. Type BIB (Base -Inertia Base) 1. Inertia bases shall be formed of stone-aggregate concrete (150 lb/cu. ft.) and appropriate steel reinforcing cast between welded or bolted perimeter structural steel channels. Inertia bases shall be built to form a rigid base that will not twist, Jordan & Skala Engineers CONTROL, SEISMIC AND WIND RESTRAINT NOISE AND VIBRATION 23 0548 -7 rack, deform, deflect, or crack in any manner that would negatively affect the supported equipment or the vibration isolation mounts. Inertia bases shall be adequately sized to support basic equipment units and motors plus any associated pipe elbow supports, duct elbow supports, electrical control elements, or other components closely related and requiring resilient support in order to prevent vibration transfer to the building structure. Inertia base depth shall be at least 1/12 the longest dimension of the base supported between isolators and not less than 6". The base footprint shall be large enough to provide stability for supported equipment. Inertia bases shall include side mounting brackets for attachment to vibration isolators. Mounting brackets shall be located on the sides of the base that are parallel to the axis of rotation of the supported equipment.  Concrete may be provided by the General Contractor. 2. Frame and reinforcement for Type BIB bases shall be one of the following products or approved equal: a. Type CPF A.B. b. Type KSL or BMK M.I. c. Type CIB-L or CIB-H K.N.C. d. Type SN V.E. e. Series MPF or WPF V.M.&C. f. Type CIB V.A. D. Type RC-1 (Roof Curb, Type 1) 1. Type RC-1 isolation bases shall be a prefabricated assembly consisting of an extruded aluminum frame and steel spring isolation system that fits over the roof curb and under the isolated equipment. The aluminum frame shall be sufficiently rigid to support the equipment load without detrimental twist or deflection. Spring isolators shall be selected and positioned along the curb to achieve the minimum static deflection called for in the schedule. The static deflection shall be constant around the entire periphery of the base. Springs shall be free standing, laterally stable with a diameter of not less than 0.8 times the compressed height, and have additional travel-to-solid that is at least 50% of the rated deflection. Resilient neoprene snubbers shall be provided at the corners of the base to limit equipment movement to 1/4" under wind load. 2. The isolation curb base shall be made weather tight by sealing all around the periphery with closed cell neoprene or flexible membrane that shall in no way inhibit the vibration isolation of the spring elements. Closed cell sponge gasketing or field caulking shall be used between the equipment unit and the isolation curb base and between the isolation curb and roof curb to form a weather-tight seal. Each spring isolator used in the curbs shall be weather-protected as described in the PRODUCTS section under General. 3. Type RC-1 vibration isolation curb bases shall be supplied by the isolator manufacturer and shall be one of the following products or approved equal: a. Type RTIR A.B. b. Type CMAB M.I. c. Type ASR K.N.C. d. Type AR V.E. e. Series AXR V.M.&C. f. Type VCR V.A. E. Type RC-2 (Roof Curb, Type 2) 1. Type RC-2 isolation bases shall be a prefabricated assembly consisting of a structural steel frame and steel spring isolation system that also forms the roof curb under the isolated equipment. The steel frame shall be sufficiently rigid to support the equipment load without detrimental twist or deflection. Spring isolators shall be selected and positioned along the curb to achieve the minimum static Jordan & Skala Engineers CONTROL, SEISMIC AND WIND RESTRAINT NOISE AND VIBRATION 23 0548 -8 deflection called for in the schedule. The static deflection shall be constant around the entire periphery of the base. Springs shall be free standing, laterally stable with a diameter of not less than 0.8 times the compressed height, and have additional travel-to-solid that is at least 50% of the rated deflection. Spring isolators shall include travel limit stops that are capable of serving as blocking during erection of the equipment. A minimum clearance of 1/4" shall be maintained around restraining bolts as they pass through the limit stop brackets.  Springs and limits stops shall be provided at the corners of the base to limit equipment movement to 1/4" under wind load. 2. The isolation curb base shall be made weather tight by sealing all around the periphery with closed cell neoprene, flexible membrane or light gauge spring metal loop, which shall in no way inhibit the vibration isolation of the spring elements.  A closed cell sponge gasket or field caulking shall be used between the equipment unit and the isolation curb base and between the isolation curb and roof curb to form a weather-tight seal. Each spring isolator used in the curbs shall be weather-protected as described in the PRODUCTS section under General. 3. Type RC-2 vibration isolation curb bases shall be supplied by the isolator manufacturer and shall be one of the following products or approved equal: a. Type RSC M.I. b. Type SSR K.N.C. c. Vibrocurb ThyCurb d. ARTR/VCR V.A. F. Type RP-1 (Low Profile Structural Roof Platform for Air Cooled Chillers and Cooling Towers) 1. Type RP-1 isolation platform bases shall be a prefabricated assembly consisting of a structural steel frame and steel spring isolation system that also forms the roof platform under the isolated equipment. The steel frame shall be sufficiently rigid to support the equipment load without detrimental twist or deflection. Spring isolators shall be selected and positioned along the curb to achieve the minimum static deflection called for in the schedule. Springs shall have appropriate wind restraint. The static deflection shall be constant around the entire periphery of the base. Springs shall be free standing, laterally stable with a diameter of not less than 0.8 times the compressed height and have additional travel-to-solid that is at least 50% of the rated deflection. Spring isolators shall include travel limit stops that are capable of serving as blocking during erection of the equipment. 2. A minimum clearance of 1/4" shall be maintained around restraining bolts as they pass through the limit stop brackets.  Springs and limits stops shall be provided at the corners of the base to limit equipment movement to 1/4" under wind load. 3. A galvanized insulated and cross broken sloped solid top shall be provided to shed water. If project location is within 50 miles of a seacoast area, the top section shall be fabricated from Type 304 stainless steel. 4. Platform access doors or sections shall be installed as required for servicing curb components or accessories. 5. The platform shall be constructed to an appropriate height so as to match the pitch of the roof insulation with adequate height to meet code minimum of 10" above final roof membrane. 6. The isolation shall allow (.") movement before resisting wind loads in any lateral direction. 7. The isolation platform shall be designed to meet all wind loading as defined by the building code having jurisdiction. Calculations shall be provided and stamped by a Professional Engineer. 8. Type RP-1vibration isolation Platform shall be supplied by the isolator manufacturer and shall be one of the following products or approved equal: Jordan & Skala Engineers CONTROL, SEISMIC AND WIND RESTRAINT NOISE AND VIBRATION 23 0548 -9 Camden Gulch Camden  HASTINGS Project #21128 Construction Documents 2023.04.03  2.03  a. VSPS VIBRATION ISOLATOR SCHEDULE  V.A.  Equipment Type  Base Type  Isolator Type  Minimum Deflection  Air Handling Units – Floor Mounted < 1 HP  - DNPx2  1/10"  Air Handling Units – Floor Mounted > 1 HP  - FNC  3/8"  Air Handling Units – Internally Isolated  - DNPx2  1/10"  Air Handling Units – Suspended > 1 HP  - HSN  1"  Dedicated Outdoor Air Rooftop Units <25 Tons  - RC-2  1"  Dedicated Outdoor Air Rooftop Units >25 Tons  - RC-2  2"  Fan Coil Units – Floor Mounted  - DNP  1/10"  Fan Coil Units – Suspended  - HN  3/8"  Fans – Floor Mounted < 1 HP  BSF  DNPx2  1/10"  Fans – Floor Mounted > 1 HP  BSF  FNC  3/8"  Fans – Suspended < 1 HP  - HN  3/8"  Fans – Suspended > 1 HP  - HSN  1"  Generator  - FSNTL  2"  Generator Exhaust Pipe  - HSN  2"  Packaged Roof Top Units <25 Tons  - RC-2  1"  Packaged Roof Top Units >25 Tons  - RC-2  2"  Split System Heat Pump Units < 5 Tons  - NP  1/10"  Split System Heat Pump Units > 5 Tons  BSR  FSN  1"  VRF/VRV  DNP  1/10"  2.04 RESILIENT PENETRATION SLEEVE/SEAL A. Resilient penetration sleeve/seals shall be field-fabricated from a pipe or sheet metal section that is l/2" to 3/4" larger than the penetrating element in all directions around the element, and shall be used to provide a sleeve through the construction penetrated. The sleeve shall extend 1" beyond the penetrated construction on each side. The space between the sleeve and the penetrating element shall be packed with glass fiber or mineral wool to within 1/4" of the ends of the sleeve.  The remaining 1/4" space on each end shall be filled with acoustical sealant to form an airtight seal. The penetrating element shall be able to pass through the sleeve without contacting the sleeve. Alternatively, prefabricated sleeves accomplishing the same result are acceptable. 2.05 RESILIENT LATERAL SUPPORTS A. These units shall either be a standard product of the vibration isolator manufacturer, or be custom fabricated from standard components. These units shall incorporate neoprene isolation elements similar to Type FN that are specifically designed to provide resilient lateral bracing of ducts or pipes. B. Resilient lateral supports shall be one of the following products or approved equal: 1. Type Custom A.B. 2. Type ADA M.I. 3. Type RGN K.N.C. 4. Type VERG or VPL V.E. 5. Type MDPA V.M.&C. 6. Type RD V.A. 2.06 FLEXIBLE DUCT CONNECTIONS A. Flexible duct connections shall be made from coated fabric. The clear space between connected parts shall be a minimum of 3", and the connection shall have a minimum of 1.5" of slack material. 2.07 FLEXIBLE PIPE CONNECTIONS Jordan & Skala Engineers CONTROL, SEISMIC AND WIND RESTRAINT NOISE AND VIBRATION 23 0548 -10 A. Flexible pipe connections shall be fabricated of multiple plies of nylon cord, fabric, and neoprene, and shall be vulcanized so as to become inseparable and homogeneous.  Flexible connections shall be formed in a double sphere shape, and shall be able to accept compressive, elongating, transverse, and angular movements. B. The flexible connections shall be selected and specially fitted, if necessary, to suit the system temperature, pressure, and fluid type. In addition, suitable flexible connections should be selected, if possible, which do not require rods or cables to control extension of the connector. C. Connectors for pipe sizes 2" or smaller shall have threaded female union couplings on each end.  Larger sizes shall be fitted with metallic flange couplings. D. Flexible pipe connections shall be one of the following or an approved equal: 1. Type 2600 or 2655 A.B. 2. Type Twin Sphere Metraflex 3. Type MFTNC or MFTFU M.I. 4. Double Sphere Flexible Connectors V.E. 5. Series VMT or VMU V.M.&C. 6. Type Twin Sphere Twin City Hose 2.08 THRUST RESTRAINTS A. Thrust restraints shall consist of a spring element in series with a neoprene pad. The unit shall be designed to have the same deflection due to thrust-generated loads as specified for the isolators supporting the equipment. The spring element shall be contained within a steel frame and be designed so it can be pre-compressed at the factory to allow for a maximum of 1/4" movement during starting or stopping of the equipment. Allowable movement shall be field-adjustable. The assembly shall be furnished complete with rods and angle brackets for attachment to both the equipment and the adjacent fixed structural anchor. The thrust restraints shall be installed on the discharge of the fan so that the restraint rods are in tension. Assemblies that place the rods in compression are not acceptable. The holes in the spring restraint brackets through which the restraint rods pass must be oversized to prevent contact between the brackets and rods. B. Thrust restraints shall be one of the following products or an approved equal: 1. Type TRK A.B. 2. Type HSR K.N.C. 3. Type WB M.I. 4. Thrust Restraint V.E. 5. Type SHR V.A. 2.09 GROMMETS A. Grommets shall be made of neoprene or neoprene impregnated duct that is specially formed to prevent bolts from directly contacting the isolator base plate, and shall be sized so that they will be loaded within the manufacturer’s recommended load range. B. Grommets shall either be custom made by combining a neoprene washer and sleeve, or be one of the following products or an approved equal: 1. Type Isogrommets MBIS, Inc. (Bedford Heights, OH) 2. Type WB Barry Controls (Brighton, MA) 3. Type HG Mason Industries Inc. (Hauppauge, NY) 4. Type GW V.A. 2.10 ACOUSTICAL SEALANT A. Sealants for acoustical purposes as described in this specification shall be silicone or one of the resilient, non-hardening sealants indicated below: 1. Acoustical sealant D.A.P. 2. BR-96 or AC-20 (AC-20 FTR -Fire Rated) Pecora 3. Sonoloc Sanborn 4. Acoustical Sealant #834 (Acrylic Latex) Tremco 5. Acoustical sealant U.S.G. Jordan & Skala Engineers CONTROL, SEISMIC AND WIND RESTRAINT NOISE AND VIBRATION 23 0548 -11 PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.01 APPLICATION A. General 1. Refer to the PRODUCTS section of this specification for vibration isolation devices identified on the Drawings or specified herein. 2. The static deflection of all isolators specified herein is the minimum acceptable deflections for the mounts under actual load. Isolators selected solely on the basis of rated deflection are not acceptable and will be disapproved. B. Major Equipment Isolation 1. Unless otherwise shown or specified, all floor-mounted major equipment shall be set on housekeeping pads.  See architectural or structural drawings for details. 2. Types and minimum static deflections of vibration isolation devices for major equipment items shall be as scheduled on the Drawings or specified hereunder. 3. Flexible duct connections shall be installed at all fan unit intakes, fan unit discharges, and wherever else shown on the Drawings. 4. Flexible pipe connections shall be installed at all pipe connections to vibration-isolated equipment in the positions shown on the Drawings. 5. Electrical connections to vibration-isolated equipment shall be flexible, as called for in the electrical portion of the specification. 6. Thrust restraints shall be installed on all suspended fans and on all floor-mounted fans developing 4" or more of static pressure, unless the horizontal component of the thrust force can be demonstrated to be less than 10% of the equipment weight. C. Miscellaneous HVAC Equipment Isolation 1. Miscellaneous pieces of HVAC equipment, such as converters, pressure reducing stations, dryers, strainers, storage tanks, condensate receiver tanks, and expansion tanks, which are connected to isolated piping systems, shall be vibration-isolated from the building structure by Type NP or Type HN isolators (selected for 0.1" static deflection), unless their position in the piping system requires a higher degree of isolation as called for under Pipe Isolation. D. Pipe Isolation 1. All refrigerant, drain and engine exhaust piping that is connected to vibration-isolated equipment shall be isolated from the building structure within the following limits: a. Within mechanical rooms; b. Within 50' total pipe length of connected vibration-isolated equipment (chillers, pumps, air handling units, pressure reducing stations, etc.); c. At every support point for piping that is greater than 4" in diameter. 2. Piping shall be isolated from the building structure by means of vibration isolators, resilient lateral supports, and resilient penetration sleeve/seals. 3. Isolators for the first three support points adjacent to connected equipment shall achieve one half the specified static deflection of the isolators supporting the connected equipment. When the required static deflection of these isolators is greater than 1/2", Type FSN or HSN isolators shall be used. When the required static deflection is less than or equal to 1/2", Type FN or HN isolators shall be used. All other pipe support isolators within the specified limits shall be either Type FN or HN achieving at least 1/4" static deflection. 4. Where lateral support of pipes is required within the specified limits, this shall be accomplished by use of resilient lateral supports. 5. Pipes within the specified limits that penetrate the building construction shall be isolated from the building structure by use of resilient penetration sleeve/seals. 6. Provide flexible pipe connections as called for under Major Equipment above and wherever shown on the Drawings. E. Duct Isolation Jordan & Skala Engineers CONTROL, SEISMIC AND WIND RESTRAINT NOISE AND VIBRATION 23 0548 -12 1. All sheet metal ducts and air plenums that are within mechanical rooms or within a distance of 50' total duct length of connected vibration-isolated equipment (whichever is longer) shall be isolated from the building structure by Type FN, PCF or HN isolators.  All isolators shall achieve 0.1" minimum static deflection. 2. Ducts within the specified limits that penetrate the building construction shall be isolated from the building structure by use of resilient penetration sleeve/seals. 3. Flexible duct connections shall be provided as called for above under Major Equipment and wherever shown on the Drawings. 3.02 INSTALLATION OF VIBRATION ISOLATION EQUIPMENT A. General 1. Locations of all vibration isolation devices shall be selected for ease of inspection and adjustment as well as for proper operation. 2. Installation of vibration isolation equipment shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. B. Isolators 1. All vibration isolators shall be aligned squarely above or below mounting points of the supported equipment. 2. Isolators for equipment with bases shall be located on the sides of the bases which are parallel to the equipment shaft unless this is not possible because of physical constraints. 3. Locate isolators to provide stable support for equipment, without excess rocking. Consideration shall be given to the location of the center of gravity of the system and the location and spacing of the isolators. If necessary, a base with suitable footprint shall be provided to maintain stability of supported equipment, whether or not such a base is specifically called for herein. 4. If a housekeeping pad is provided, the isolators shall bear on the housekeeping pad and the isolator base plates shall rest entirely on the pad. 5. Hanger rods for vibration-isolated support shall be connected to major structural members, not the floor slab between major structural members. Provide suitable intermediate support members as necessary. 6. Vibration isolation hanger elements shall be positioned as high as possible in the hanger rod assembly, but not in contact with the building structure, and so that the hanger housing may rotate a full 360 degrees about the rod axis without contacting any object. 7. Parallel running pipes may be hung together on a trapeze that is isolated from the building. Isolator deflections must be the greatest required by the provisions for pipe isolation for any single pipe on the trapeze. Do not mix isolated and un.isolated pipes on the same trapeze. 8. Pipes, ducts and equipment shall not be supported from other pipes, ducts and equipment. 9. Resiliently isolated pipes, ducts and equipment shall not come in rigid contact with the building construction or rigidly supported equipment. 10. The installed and operating heights of equipment supported by Type FSNTL isolators or with Type RC-2 isolation bases shall be identical.  Limit stops shall be out of contact during normal operation. Adjust isolators to provide 1/4" clearance between the limit stop brackets and the isolator top plate, and between the travel limit nuts and travel limit brackets. 11. Adjust all leveling bolts and hanger rod bolts so that the isolated equipment is level and in proper alignment with connecting ducts or pipes. C. Bases 1. No equipment unit shall bear directly on vibration isolators unless its own frame is suitably rigid to span between isolators and such direct support is approved by the equipment manufacturer. This provision shall apply whether or not a base frame Jordan & Skala Engineers CONTROL, SEISMIC AND WIND RESTRAINT NOISE AND VIBRATION 23 0548 -13 is called for on the schedule. In the case that a base frame is required for the unit because of the equipment manufacturer’s requirements and is not specifically called for on the equipment schedule, a base frame recommended by the equipment manufacturer shall be provided at no additional expense. 2. Unless otherwise indicated, there is to be a minimum operating clearance of 1" between steel rails, steel frame bases or inertia bases and the floor beneath the equipment. The isolator mounting brackets shall be positioned and the isolators adjusted so that the required clearance is maintained. The clearance space shall be checked by the Contractor to ensure that no construction debris has been left to short circuit or restrict the proper operation of the vibration isolation system. 3. Isolation bases shall be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. D. Flexible Duct Connections 1. Prior to installation of the flexible connection, sheet metal ducts and plenum openings shall be squarely aligned with the fan discharge, fan intake, or adjacent duct section and the gap between connected parts shall be uniform. Flexible duct connections shall not be installed until this provision is met. There shall be no metal-to-metal contact between connected sections, and the fabric shall not be stretched taut. E. Flexible Pipe Connections 1. Install flexible pipe connections in strict accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. F. Thrust Restraints 1. Thrust restraints shall be attached on each side of the fan parallel to the thrust force. This may require custom brackets or standoffs. The body of the thrust restraint shall not come in contact with the connected elements. Thrust restraints shall be adjusted to constrain equipment movement to the specified limit. G. Grommets 1. Where grommets are required at hold down bolts of isolators, bolt holes shall be properly sized to allow for grommets. The hold down bolt assembly shall include washers to distribute load evenly over the grommets. Bolts and washers shall be galvanized. H. Resilient Penetration Sleeve/Seals 1. Maintain an airtight seal around the penetrating element and prevent rigid contact between the penetrating element and the building structure. Fit the sleeve tightly to the building construction and seal airtight on both sides of the construction penetrated with acoustical sealant. END OF SECTION 23 0548 Jordan & Skala Engineers CONTROL, SEISMIC AND WIND RESTRAINT NOISE AND VIBRATION 23 0548 -14 SECTION 23 0593 -TESTING, ADJUSTING AND BALANCING (TAB) PART 1 -GENERAL 1.01 DESCRIPTION A. Refer to specification section 23 00 00 -HVAC General, all of which applies to work described in this section as if written in full herein. B. The work described by this section of the specifications consists of furnishing all materials, instruments, labor, and appurtenances to test, adjust and balance all of the HVAC systems furnished and installed under Division 23 of the specifications. C. The TAB agency shall be a subcontractor of the General Contractor and shall not report to or be paid by the HVAC Contractor. The HVAC subcontractor shall be responsible to cooperate with and provide for the balancing subcontractor any and all materials, services, labor, etc. to facilitate completion of the balancing work. 1.02 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. The TAB agency and its specialists shall be certified members of Associated Air Balance Council (AABC) or certified by the National Environmental Balance Bureau (NEBB) to perform TAB service for HVAC. The certification shall be maintained for the entire duration of duties specified herein. The TAB agency shall have been in business for at least the past five years and must be free of disciplinary action by either the AABC or the NEBB during that time. B. All TAB technicians performing actual TAB work shall be experienced and must have done satisfactory work on a minimum of 3 projects comparable in size and complexity of this project and must be certified so by the TAB agency in writing. C. The basic instrumentation shall be calibrated to accuracy requirements by its manufacturer, AABC or NEBB Procedural Standards for Testing, Adjusting and Balancing of Environmental Systems. Submit calibration history of the instruments to be used for test and balance purpose during the preliminary and final submittal phase. D. One or more of the applicable AABC, NEBB or SMACNA publications, supplemented by the ASHRAE Handbooks and requirements stated herein shall be the basis for planning, procedures, tolerances and reports. Final report shall cite the exact names of publications used as a basis or reference for the TAB work or reports. 1.03 DEFINITIONS A. Retain definition(s) remaining after this Section has been edited. B. AABC:  Associated Air Balance Council. C. NEBB:  National Environmental Balancing Bureau. D. TAB:  Testing, adjusting, and balancing. E. TABB:  Testing, Adjusting, and Balancing Bureau. F. TAB Specialist:  An entity engaged to perform TAB Work. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.01 MATERIALS A. Provide plastic plugs to seal holes drilled in ductwork for test purposes. B. Provide for repair of insulation removed or damaged for TAB work to match installation. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.01 TAB PROCEDURES A. TAB shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of the Standard under which the TAB agency is certified, either AABC or NEBB. B. During TAB all related system components shall be in full operation including the Building Automation System/Automatic Temperature Controls system. Fan and pump rotation, motor loads and equipment vibration shall be checked and corrected as necessary before proceeding with TAB. Set controls and/or block off parts of distribution systems to simulate design operation of variable volume air or water systems for test and balance work. C. Adjustment of the temperature controls shall be coordinated by the TAB work specialist in conjunction with the Building Automation System/Automatic Temperature Control Company’s Engineer. Both shall cooperate to simulate a complete cycle for every system in every mode of operation (automatic, economizer, fire emergency, etc.). D. Coordinate TAB procedures with any phased construction completion requirements for the project. Provide TAB reports for each phase of the project prior to partial final inspections of each phase of the project. E. Test and balance required in dwelling units must be completed and the TAB report submitted prior to occupancy. Coordinate with the general contractor, owner’s representative, and mechanical subcontractor to schedule TAB well in advance of occupancy. F. Record dates and time of day of all tests, and ambient conditions (dry bulb and wet bulb). 3.02 AIR SYSTEMS TAB A. Systems shall be tested, adjusted and balanced so that air quantities and temperatures at outlets are as shown on the Contract Drawings and so that the distribution from supply outlets is uniform over the face of each outlet. B. Direct reading velocity meters may be used for comparative adjustment of individual outlets, but air quantities in ducts having velocities of 1,000 feet per minute or greater shall be measured by means of pitot tubes and inclined gauge manometers. Instrument test opening enclosures shall be provided as required at the direction of the TAB agency. C. Adjustments shall be made in such a manner that splitter and volume adjusters close to air outlets will have the least pressure drop consistent with volume requirements. Primary balancing shall be obtained by adjustment of the dampers at branch duct take-offs. Adjustable fan drives shall be used for making final adjustments of total air quantities. Additional dampers or other air volume adjusters required to accomplish the balancing and adjusting shall be furnished and installed as part of the HVAC work. D. Artificially load air filters by partial blanking to produce air pressure drop of at least 90 percent of the design final pressure drop. E. Check and readjust factory set minimum and maximum air terminal unit flow rates if necessary. Balance air distribution on full cooling maximum. Reset room thermostats and check operation from maximum to minimum cooling, to the heating mode, and back to cooling. Record and report the heating coil leaving air temperature when in the maximum heating mode. F. Adjust fan speeds to provide design air flow. Adjust V-belt drives, including fixed pitch pulley requirements. G. After completion of the testing, adjusting and balancing of the air systems, provide electronic files (e.g. PDFs, etc.) of the complete test report showing the minimum following information which shall be submitted to the Engineer for review: 1. Systems inspection narrative on equipment and installation for conformance with design 2. Duct Air Leakage Test Report 3. Systems Readiness Report 4. TAB report covering flow balance and adjustments, performance tests. Required information: a. Location of each air outlet or inlet. This shall be presented in the form of a reduced size floor plan showing outlet number keyed to the outlet number in the report. b. Dimensions or size of each outlet or inlet c. Type and manufacturer of diffusers, grilles, registers. Indicate duty as supply, return, exhaust, etc. d. CFM of air as indicated on the Drawings for each outlet or inlet with corresponding velocity e. Velocity of air as measured and corresponding cfm at which system has been balanced and adjusted, for each outlet or inlet f. Velocity of air measured and corresponding cfm, after each complete system has been balanced and adjusted, for each main branch or zone duct at the supply fan, the return fan and the exhaust fan, as the case may be g. After each complete system has been balanced and adjusted, the total cfm at fan discharge, the total return air to the apparatus, the total outside air to the apparatus, the total outside air to the apparatus, static pressure at fan outlet, total static pressure for apparatus, fan speed, motor amperage for each phase and voltage 5. Narrative of uncorrected installation deficiencies noted during TAB and applicable explanatory comments on test results that differ from design requirements. H. The above testing, adjusting, and balancing shall be performed for the first season of the year, cooling season or heating season, which occurs at the completion of the building. Additional balancing and adjusting which may be required for the season of the year next following shall be performed as part of the work under this specification. I. Ventilation air distribution systems (outdoor air and exhaust air) shall be balanced to achieve the airflow rates indicated on the drawings. These airflow rates shall be considered minimum rates. The measured air balance tolerance for both outdoor air and exhaust air rates shall be -0% to +10%. J. For dwelling units, outdoor air and exhaust air shall be balanced to achieve the airflow rates indicated on the drawings. Test and balance the air handling unit and record cfm and static pressure in the tab report. Ventilation air distribution systems (outdoor air and exhaust air) shall be balanced to achieve the airflow rates indicated on the drawings. These airflow rates shall be considered minimum rates. The measured air balance tolerance for both outdoor air and exhaust air rates shall be -0% to +10%. K. All parking garage mechanical ventilation systems shall be tested, adjusted, and balanced to provide air quantities indicated. L. Where smoke management systems are to be tested to specific requirements established by the owner or authorities having jurisdiction, refer to the drawings for specific criteria. 3.03 MARKING OF SETTINGS AND TEST PORTS A. Following the approval of the final TAB Report, the setting of all HVAC adjustment devices including valves, splitters and dampers shall be permanently marked by the TAB Specialist so that adjustment can be restored if disturbed at any time. Style and colors used for markings shall be coordinated with the General Contractor. B. The TAB Specialist shall permanently and legibly identify the location points of duct test ports. If the ductwork has exterior insulation, the identification shall be made on the exterior side of the insulation. All penetrations through ductwork and ductwork insulation shall be sealed to prevent air leaks and maintain integrity of vapor barrier. END OF SECTION 23 0593 SECTION 23 0700 -HVAC INSULATION PART 1 -GENERAL 1.01 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS A. All work specified herein shall be accomplished in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section 23 00 00 -HVAC General. B. The insulation shall be installed in a neat and workmanlike manner by trained personnel regularly engaged in the installation of insulation and approved by the insulation manufacturer. Insulation, adhesives, coverings and coatings shall be applied in strict accordance with its respective manufacturer’s recommendations. Installer has been in business for no less than 5 years and has completed at least 10 installations of similar size projects. C. The contractor shall verify that test and inspection of the work to be insulated have been completed and approved before the insulation is applied. D. All insulation must meet applicable codes for Flame Spread and Smoke Developed ratings when tested in accordance with ASTM 84 and UL 723. E. VOC Content: Submit adhesive and sealants product information or MSDS showing VOC content information for all applicable products specified under this section. All applicable products in this section must meet low VOC content as specified by LEED Specification Section 01 81 16: Facility Environmental Requirements. All work performed under this specification shall be accomplished in accordance with the requirements and provisions of the following sections: 1. Section 01 81 13 Sustainable Design Requirements 2. Section 01 81 16 Facility Environmental Requirements 3. Section 01 81 19 Indoor Air Quality Requirements 4. Section 01 91 00 Commissioning 1.02 WORK INCLUDED A. The work done under this section shall include all labor, materials, accessories, services and equipment necessary to furnish and install all insulation, complete, as indicated on the Drawings and as specified herein. 1.03 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Materials shall be the standard products of manufacturers regularly engaged in the production of insulation products.  Insulation materials shall be products that have been in use in commercial buildings for at least 2 years prior to bid opening. B. Surface Burning Characteristics: 1. Insulation shall have a composite insulation, jacket, binders, and adhesive Flame-Spread rating of 25 or less and a Smoke-Developed rating of 50 or less and shall be so listed by UL. 2. Insulation and related materials shall have surface burning characteristics determined by test performed on identical products per ASTM E 84, NFPA 255, and UL 723, mounted and installed as per ASTM E 2231. 3. Adhesives, mastics, tapes, and other accessories shall have the same component ratings. 4. Materials shall be labeled indicating compliance with the above requirements. 5. All testing shall be performed by a testing and inspecting agency acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction. Insulation, jacket materials, adhesives, mastics, tapes and cement material containers shall be labeled with appropriate markings of applicable testing and inspecting agency. 1.04 RELATED WORK A. Where pipes and ducts pass through fire walls, fire partitions, above grade floors, and fire rated chase walls, the penetration shall be protected and sealed with fire-stopping materials as specified in Section 23 00 00 -HVAC General. B. Adequate provisions shall be made to protect the premises, equipment, and the work of other trades against droppings, adhesives and coatings used in the installation. Jordan & Skala Engineers HVAC INSULATION 23 0700 -1 C. Where indicated, painting of insulation jackets shall be as specified in Section 09 91 00 .Painting. D. Refer to Section 23 23 00 Refrigerant Piping, Insulation and Accessories for refrigerant piping insulation. 1.05 SUBMITTALS A. Submit product information for insulation materials to the Architect in accordance with Division 1 and Section 23 00 00 -HVAC General. B. Submit shop drawings and data to prove complete compliance with these specifications on products and methods of installation. Include materials used, thickness for each application, flame and smoke ratings, thermal conductivity, permeance, density for each product, and jackets (both factory and field applied). Indicate methods of applications. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.01 GENERAL A. Provide materials which are the standard products of manufacturers regularly engaged in the manufacture of such products and that essentially duplicate items that have been in satisfactory use for at least 2 years prior to purchase. Insulation shall be CFC and HCFC free. B. Provide insulation that meets or exceed the requirements of ASHRAE 90.1. C. Insulation exterior shall be cleanable, grease resistant, non-flaking and non-peeling. Materials shall be compatible and shall not contribute to corrosion, soften, or otherwise attack surfaces to which applied in either wet or dry state. 2.02 PIPE INSULATION FOR STEAM AND WATER PIPING A. Materials as specified in this section shall be manufactured by Armstrong, Johns-Manville, Knauf, Pittsburgh-Corning, CertainTeed, Pabco, Dow Chemical, Owens Corning or approved equal.  B. Insulation thicknesses shall be as shown in the following table: Minimum Pipe Insulation  Insulation Thickness for Pipe Sizes  Piping System Types  Fluid Operating Temperature Range  Mean Rating Temp.  Less than 1 in.  1 to less than 1-1/2 in.  1-1/2 to less than 4 in.  4 to less than 8 in.  8 in. and Larger  .C  .F  .F  In.  In.  In.  In.  In.  (Cooling Systems)  Condensate, refrigerant lineset  4.4-15.6  40-60  75  0.5  1.0  1.0  1.0  1.5  *  C. Unless noted otherwise, the abovementioned piping systems inside the building shall be insulated with a 5 lb/ft3 (nominal) density sectional fiberglass insulation with a thermal conductivity (k factor) not to exceed 0.23BTU·in/hr·ft.·°F (0.033 W/m K), when tested in accordance with ASTM C 335 at 75 °F (24 °C). The jacket shall be fire retardant with a suitable vapor barrier. All joints and seams shall be sealed vapor tight. All joints and seams shall be lapped in place to form a continuous vapor barrier covering. All seams shall then be covered with “All Service Jacket” (ASJ) 3" wide tape. The tape shall match the jacket. The tape shall be squeegeed in place to provide complete adhesion of the tape to the jacket and to provide a continuous vapor barrier covering. Exterior water piping shall be heat traced (Refer to Section 23 21 13 -PIPING AND ACCESSORIES). D. Piping installed outdoors shall be insulated with cellular glass insulation, Pittsburgh-Corning “Foamglas” or approved equal. Insulation thickness required to prevent condensation shall be determined by the manufacturer for worse case ambient conditions. Jordan & Skala Engineers HVAC INSULATION 23 0700 -2 1. Install with all service jacket and in accordance with manufacturer’s recommendations. 2. Where heat tracing is specified, oversize insulation to allow space for heat tape. E. Equipment shall be insulated in the same manner as specified for the associated piping. Suitable provisions shall be made for breaking flanges as may be required for maintenance. Hot water pumps do not get insulated unless specifically called for. The following equipment, but not limited to, requires insulation: expansion tanks, air separators, chemical treatment “shot type” feeders, storage tanks, etc. F. Provide high density preformed pipe insulation inserts at all pipe hangers. Inserts shall be equal to Foamglas by Pittsburgh Corning or calcium silicate. Provide ribbed hanger saddles by Centerline, Buckaroos, Inc. or approved equal. G. All exposed insulated piping in mechanical rooms below 10'-0" AFF shall be protected by a corrugated aluminum jacket with bands 3'-0" on center. H. “Circuit setter” type balancing valves shall be insulated with polyisocyanurate or extruded polystyrene block insulation with matching PVC cover. Insulation shall by easily removable for service.  Valve insulation shall be as manufactured by Extol or approved equal. I. Provide insulating tape over all piping specialties to prevent condensation such as drain valves, drain plugs, combination temperature/pressure test plugs, etc. 2.03 BLANKET TYPE INSULATION (DUCTWRAP) A. Description: 1. Flexible, limited combustible, blanket type insulation composed of mineral or inorganic glass fibers bonded together with a thermosetting resin, meeting ASTM C 553, Type 1 and ASTM C 1290. 2. Vapor retarder jacket: Provide one of the following types of vapor retarder jackets: a. Foil-scrim-kraft (FSK), foil reinforced kraft (FRK), or polypropylene-scrim.kraft (PSK) with a 2" (50mm) (min.) stapling and taping flange on one edge. b. Conforming to ASTM C 1136 Type II. 3. Surface Temperature Application Limits: Insulation shall be rated for use on surfaces operating at temperatures up to 250°F. 4. Ratings: Insulation Type:  Type 1:  Type 2:  Type 2:  Minimum R-Value, out of package*: hr•ft.•°F/Btu (m.•°C/W) at 75°F (24°C) mean temperature  R-7.4 (1.30)  R-10.3 (1.81)  R-15.0 (2.66)  Minimum R-Value, installed: hr•ft.•°F/Btu (m.•°C/W) at 75°F (24°C) mean temperature  R-6.0 (1.06)  R-8.0 (1.46)  R-12.0 (2.16)  Minimum Density: lb/ft. (kg/m.)  1.0 (16)  0.75 (12)  0.75 (12)  Thickness: Inches (mm)  2 (51)  3 (76)  4 2/5 (112)  Maximum Labeled K-value at 75.F (24°C) mean temperature: Btu.•in/hr.•ft.•.F (W/m.•.C)  0.27 (0.039)  0.29 (0.042)  0.29 (0.042)  *Value may vary by manufacturer; minimum installed value must be met B. Insulate the following with Type 1 blanket insulation: 1. All galvanized steel ductwork containing heated and/or cooled supply air, except: a. Exposed ductwork in finished conditioned spaces. b. Ductwork indicated to be internally lined or insulated with external insulation. 2. Concealed surfaces of ceiling diffusers exposed to non-return air plenums. 3. Return air ductwork exposed to attics or non-return air plenums. Jordan & Skala Engineers HVAC INSULATION 23 0700 -3 4. Relief air ductwork and plenums from the exterior to 18” past the relief air damper assembly. 5. Return air, toilet exhaust, and general exhaust ductwork exhausting conditioned air and routed through interior spaces that are ventilated with outside air or exposed to outside air conditions. 6. Concealed outside air ductwork located within indirectly conditioned spaces (e.g. indoor soffits, furr-downs, vertical chases, etc.). 7. Ductwork and plenums located inside of the building (i.e. located within the exterior boundary or skin of the building thermal envelope) when containing or flowing, makeup air, garage ventilation intake or exhaust air ducts and plenums, when not indicated to be insulated with rigid fiberglass insulation.  This applies to ducts and plenums whether exposed or concealed within chases when located on the interior side of the exterior skin of heated or cooled space. C. Insulate the following with Type 2 blanket insulation: 1. Ductwork and plenums located outside of the exterior boundary or skin of the building thermal envelope when containing or flowing heated and/or cooled air when not indicated to be insulated with rigid fiberglass insulation. 2. Supply air ductwork located in unconditioned attic spaces and in indoor spaces that are ventilated with outside air or exposed to outside air conditions.  3. Concealed surfaces of ceiling diffusers exposed to attics. D. Subject to compliance with requirements, insulation shall be manufactured by:  CertainTeed, Johns Manville, Knauf, Owens Corning, or approved equal. 2.04 DUCT LINER A. Refer to Section 23 31 00 – Ductwork and Accessories for duct liner requirements. 2.05 EXTERIOR SUPPLY AND RETURN AIR DUCTWORK A. Exterior supply and return air ductwork shall be constructed of galvanized sheet metal lined with 2" thick 3 lb/ft3 duct liner board (R-8 min.), Johns-Manville Linacoustic R-300. All ductwork seams shall be externally sealed watertight with a 30-year silicone caulk and coated with a rust preventive coating over the entire duct surface. 1. As an alternative to insulated sheet metal, an outdoor duct system as manufactured by Thermaduct, LLC may be used. The system shall incorporate duct and fittings having an installed minimum R-value of 12. The system shall utilize non-fibrous closed cell Kingspan KoolDuct fortified inner liner compliant to UL (C-UL) 181, Standard for Safety Listed, Class 1 system and SMACNA Class 1 leakage, or less. Submit product data and layout drawings during the submittal phase. 2. As an alternative to internal insulation, exterior insulation may be Class B foil faced polyisocyanurate foam insulation with weather resistant white flexible cladding; Alumaguard Lite White by Polyguard. Install in accordance with manufacturer’s installation instructions. 3. As an alternative to internal insulation, exterior insulation may be physically crosslinked closed cell polyolefin foam insulation with factory applied heavy duty multilayer composite foil facing with a UV and weather durable coating; Thermobreak No-Clad insulation by Sekisui Voltek. Install in accordance with manufacturer’s installation instructions. 2.06 DUCTWORK WITHIN MECHANICAL ROOMS A. Ducts within mechanical rooms shall be insulated with 1." thick, 3 lb/ft3 rigid fiberglass board with an R factor of not less than 6 (K = 0.23 at 75 degrees F mean temperature) with reinforced foil vapor barrier. Insulation shall be secured to ductwork with stick pins and speed washers. All joints and stick pin terminations shall be sealed with 3" wide strips of vapor barrier material and applied to form a continuous vapor seal. B. Apply 1" x 1" x 30 mils thick white PVC corner angles in accordance with ASTM D 1784, Class 16354-C at all insulation board corners. 2.07 SINGLE WALL BOILER BREECHING AND DIESEL EXHAUST Jordan & Skala Engineers HVAC INSULATION 23 0700 -4 A. Diesel exhaust within the building shall be externally insulated with 2" thick calcium silicate block securely held in place with wire or metal bands. 1. As an alternate to field insulated single wall breeching, a factory fabricated insulated double wall pressure stack system may be used. Refer to Section 23 31 00 Ductwork and Accessories for additional information. 2.08 EXTERIOR WEATHER PROTECTION A. Piping and/or breeching exposed to the weather and designated to be insulated shall be insulated in the same way it is insulated within the building for concealed areas. It shall then be weatherproofed with corrugated aluminum jacketing. It shall have 3/16" corrugations and shall be 0.016" thick with a factory attached moisture barrier continuously laminated across the full width of the jacketing. All pipe fittings, valves and specialties exposed to the weather shall be insulated and weatherproofed with aluminum jacketing. Childers Universe-E11 Jacs of the same metal as the jacketing shall be used. Jacketing shall have a 2" lap at all joints. Longitudinal laps shall be on the underneath side of horizontal runs and slightly offset from one another. The outside of the longitudinal lap shall also have a 1" hem turned under. All laps shall be made with weatherproof mastic. Wrap the jacketing tightly and smoothly and secure with aluminum or stainless steel bands.  Bands shall not be more than 12" on center and a strap shall be placed at the circumferential laps. The lap shall have adequate mastic to make a tight joint. Excess mastic shall be removed from the outside to provide a neat and professional appearance. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.01 INSTALLATION A. Shop drawing submittals shall include a complete package of materials and methods intended for use as described in this section. B. All work shall be in strict accordance with applicable codes, ordinances and the manufacturer’s recommendations. C. All work shall be performed in a professional workmanlike manner and standard trade practice.  It shall be smooth in appearance and suitable for finish painting. D. All exterior piping shall be installed with a corrugated aluminum jacket with bands 3'-0" on center. E. Provide insulating tape over all piping specialties to prevent condensation such as drain valves, drain plugs, combination temperature/pressure test plugs, etc. F. Fiberglass pipe insulation shall be applied to clean (free of rust) dry pipe prior to leak testing. Chilled and condenser water systems shall not be operated until the insulation is completely installed with a vapor barrier in place. Refer to Section 23 21 13 -Piping and Accessories for additional information. END OF SECTION 23 0700 Jordan & Skala Engineers HVAC INSULATION 23 0700 -5 SECTION 23 0800 -COMMISSIONING OF HVAC SYSTEMS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.01 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and other Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this section. B. The OPR and BOD documentation are included by reference for information only. C. Division 01 section “Sustainable Design Requirements” for additional LEED requirements. 1.02 SUMMARY A. This section includes commissioning process requirements for HVAC&R systems, assemblies, and equipment. B. Related Sections: 1. Division 01 Section “General Commissioning Requirements” for general commissioning process requirements. 1.03 DESCRIPTION A. Refer to Division 01 Section “General Commissioning Requirements” for the description of commissioning. 1.04 DEFINITIONS A. Refer to Division 01 Section “General Commissioning Requirements” for definitions. 1.05 SUBMITTALS A. Refer to Division 01 Section “General Commissioning Requirements” for CxA’s role. B. Refer to Division 01 Section “Submittals” for specific requirements.  C. In addition, provide the following: 1. Certificates of readiness 2. Certificates of completion of installation, prestart, and startup activities. 3. O&M manuals 4. Test reports 1.06 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Test Equipment Calibration Requirements: Contractors will comply with test manufacturer’s calibration procedures and intervals. Recalibrate test instruments immediately after instruments have been repaired resulting from being dropped or damaged. Affix calibration tags to test instruments. Furnish calibration records to CxA upon request. 1.07 COORDINATION A. Refer to Division 01 Section “General Commissioning Requirements” for requirements pertaining to coordination during the commissioning process. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.01 TEST EQUIPMENT A. All standard testing equipment required to perform startup, initial checkout and functional performance testing shall be provided by the Contractor for the equipment being tested. For example, the mechanical contractor of Division 23 shall ultimately be responsible for all standard testing equipment for the HVAC&R system and controls system in Division 23, except for equipment specific to and used by TAB in their commissioning responsibilities. A sufficient quantity of two-way radios shall be provided by each subcontractor. B. Special equipment, tools and instruments (specific to a piece of equipment and only available from vendor) required for testing shall be included in the base bid price to the Owner and left on site. C. Proprietary test equipment and software required by any equipment manufacturer for programming and/or start-up, whether specified or not, shall be provided by the manufacturer of the equipment. Manufacturer shall provide the test equipment, demonstrate its use, and assist in the commissioning process as needed. Proprietary test equipment (and software) shall become the property of the Owner upon completion of the commissioning process. D. All testing equipment shall be of sufficient quality and accuracy to test and/or measure system performance with the tolerances specified in the Specifications. If not otherwise noted, the following minimum requirements apply: Temperature sensors and digital thermometers shall have a certified calibration within the past year to an accuracy of 0.5.F and a resolution of + or -0.1.F. Pressure sensors shall have an accuracy of + or .2.0% of the value range being measured (not full range of meter) and have been calibrated within the last year. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.01 GENERAL DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS A. With assistance from the installing contractors, the CxA will prepare Pre-Functional Checklists for all commissioned components, equipment, and systems B. Operation and Maintenance Data: 1. Contractor will provide a copy of O&M literature within 45 days of each submittal acceptance for use during the commissioning process for all commissioned equipment and systems. 2. The CxA will review the O&M literature once for conformance to project requirements. 3. The CxA will receive a copy of the final approved O&M literature once corrections have been made by the Contractor. C. Demonstration and Training: 1. Contractor will provide demonstration and training as required by the specifications.  2. A training agenda for each training session must be submitted to the CxA one (1) week prior the training session. 3. The CxA shall be notified at least 72 hours in advance of scheduled tests. A copy of the test record shall be provided to the CxA, Owner, and Architect. 4. Engage a Factory-authorized service representative to train Owner's maintenance personnel to adjust, operate, and maintain specific equipment. 5. Train Owner’s maintenance personnel on procedures and schedules for starting and stopping, trouble shooting, servicing, and maintaining equipment. 6. Review data in O&M Manuals. 3.02 CONTRACTOR’S RESPONSIBILITIES A. Mechanical, Controls and TAB Contractors. The commissioning responsibilities applicable to each of the mechanical, controls and TAB contractors of Division 23 are as follows (all references apply to commissioned equipment only): B. Perform commissioning tests at the direction of the CxA. C. Attend construction phase controls coordination meetings. D. Attend testing, adjusting, and balancing review and coordination meetings. E. Participate in HVAC&R systems, assemblies, equipment, and component maintenance orientation and inspection as directed by the CxA. F. Provide information requested by the CxA for final commissioning documentation. G. Include requirements for submittal data, operation and maintenance data, and training in each purchase order or sub-contract written. H. Prepare preliminary schedule for Mechanical system orientations and inspections, operation and maintenance manual submissions, training sessions, pipe and duct system testing, equipment start-up, testing and balancing and task completion for owner. Distribute preliminary schedule to commissioning team members. I. Update schedule as required throughout the construction period. J. During the startup and initial checkout process, execute the related portions of the prefunctional checklists for all commissioned equipment. K. Provide measuring instruments and logging devices to record test data, and provide data acquisition equipment to record data for the complete range of testing for the required test period. L. Gather operation and maintenance literature on all equipment, and assemble in binders as required by the specifications. Submit to CxA (45) days after submittal acceptance. M. Notify the CxA a minimum of two (2) weeks in advance of the time for start of the testing and balancing work. Attend the initial testing and balancing meeting for review of the official testing and balancing procedures. N. Participate in, and schedule vendors and contractors to participate in the training sessions. O. Provide written notification to the CM/GC and CxA Authority that the following work has been completed in accordance with the contract documents, and that the equipment, systems, and sub-system are operating as required. 1. HVAC&R equipment including all fans, air handling units, ductwork, dampers, fan coil units, and all other equipment furnished under this Division. P. The equipment supplier shall document the performance of his equipment. Q. Test, Adjust and Balance Contracto 1. Attend initial commissioning coordination meeting scheduled by the Commissioning Authority. 2. Attend the testing and balancing review meeting scheduled by the CxA. Be prepared to discuss the procedures that shall be followed in testing, adjusting, and balancing the HVAC&R system. 3. At the completion of the testing and balancing work, and the submittal of the final testing and balancing report, notify the HVAC&R contractor and the CM/GC. R. Provide training of the Owner’s operating staff using expert qualified personnel, as specified. S. Equipment Suppliers 1. Provide all requested submittal data, including detailed start-up procedures and specific responsibilities of the Owner, to keep warranties in force. 2. Assist in equipment testing per agreements with contractors. 3. Provide information requested by CxA regarding equipment sequence of operation and testing procedures. T. Refer to Division 01 Section “General Commissioning Requirements” for additional contractor responsibilities. 3.03 OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITIES A. Refer to Division 01 Section “General Commissioning Requirements” for Owner’s responsibilities. 3.04 DESIGN PROFESSIONAL’S RESPONSIBILITIES A. Refer to Division 01 Section “General Commissioning Requirements” for Design Professional’s responsibilities. 3.05 CxA’S RESPONSIBILITIES A. Refer to Division 01 Section “General Commissioning Requirements” for CxA’s responsibilities. 3.06 TESTING PREPARATION A. Certify in writing to the CxA that HVAC&R systems, subsystems, and equipment have been installed, calibrated, and started and are operating according to the Contract Documents. B. Certify in writing to the CxA that HVAC&R instrumentation and control systems have been completed and calibrated, that they are operating according to the Contract Documents, and that pretest set points have been recorded. C. Certify in writing that testing, adjusting, and balancing procedures have been completed and that testing, adjusting, and balancing reports have been submitted, discrepancies corrected, and corrective work approved. D. Place systems, subsystems, and equipment into operating mode to be tested (e.g., normal shutdown, normal auto position, normal manual position, unoccupied cycle, emergency power, and alarm conditions). E. Inspect and verify the position of each device and interlock identified on checklists. F. Check safety cutouts, alarms, and interlocks with smoke control and life-safety systems during each mode of operation. G. Testing Instrumentation: Install measuring instruments and logging devices to record test data as directed by the CxA. 3.07 TESTING, ADJUSTING AND BALANCING A. Prior to performance of Testing, Adjusting and Balancing work, provide copies of reports, sample forms, checklists, and certificates to the CxA. B. Notify the CxA a minimum of two (2) weeks in advance of testing and balancing Work. 3.08 GENERAL TESTING REQUIREMENTS A. Provide technicians, instrumentation, and tools to perform commissioning test at the direction of the CxA. B. Scope of HVAC&R testing shall include entire HVAC&R installation, from central equipment for heat generation and refrigeration through distribution systems to each conditioned space. Testing shall include measuring capacities and effectiveness of operational and control functions. C. Test all operating modes, interlocks, control responses, and responses to abnormal or emergency conditions, and verify proper response of building automation system controllers and sensors. D. The CxA along with the HVAC&R contractor, Testing and Balancing Subcontractor, and HVAC&R Instrumentation and Control Subcontractor shall prepare detailed testing plans, procedures, and checklists for HVAC&R systems, subsystems, and equipment. E. Tests will be performed using design conditions whenever possible. F. Simulated conditions may need to be imposed using an artificial load when it is not practical to test under design conditions. Before simulating conditions, calibrate testing instruments. Provide equipment to simulate loads. Set simulated conditions as directed by the CxA and document simulated conditions and methods of simulation. After tests, return settings to normal operating conditions. G. The CxA may direct that sensor values be altered with a signal generator when design or simulating conditions and altering set points are not practical. H. If tests cannot be completed because of a deficiency outside the scope of the HVAC&R system, document the deficiency and report it to the Owner. After deficiencies are resolved, reschedule tests. 3.09 HVAC&R SYSTEMS, SUBSYSTEMS, AND EQUIPMENT TESTING PROCEDURES A. Equipment Testing and Acceptance Procedures: Testing requirements are specified in individual Division 23 sections. Provide submittals, test data, inspector record, and certifications to the CxA. B. Refrigeration System Testing: Provide technicians, instrumentation, tools, and equipment to test performance of chillers, refrigerant compressors and condensers, heat pumps, and other refrigeration systems. The CxA with input from the HVAC contactor and CM/GC shall determine the sequence of testing and testing procedures for each equipment item and pipe section to be tested. C. HVAC&R Distribution System Testing: Provide technicians, instrumentation, tools, and equipment to test performance of air distribution systems; special exhaust; and other distribution systems, including HVAC&R terminal equipment and unitary equipment. D. The work included in the commissioning process involves a complete and thorough evaluation of the operation and performance of all components, systems and sub.systems.  The following equipment and systems shall be evaluated: 1. Refer to Commissioning Plan for scope of work. 3.10 DEFICIENCIES/NON-CONFORMANCE, COST OF RETESTING, FAILURE DUE TO MANUFACTURER DEFECT A. Refer to Division 01 Section “General Commissioning Requirements” for requirements pertaining to deficiencies/non-conformance, cost of retesting, or failure due to manufacturer defect. 3.11 APPROVAL A. Refer to Division 01 Section “General Commissioning Requirements” for approval procedures. 3.12 DEFERRED TESTING A. Refer to Division 01 Section “General Commissioning Requirements” for requirements pertaining to deferred testing. 3.13 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE MANUALS A. The Operation and Maintenance Manuals shall conform to Contract Documents requirements as stated in Division 01. B. Refer to Division 01 Section “General Commissioning Requirements” for the AE and CxA roles in the Operation and Maintenance Manual contribution, review and approval process. C. An updated as-built version of the control drawings and sequences of operation shall be included in the final controls O&M manual submittal. 3.14 TRAINING OF OWNER PERSONNEL A. Refer to Division 01 Section “General Commissioning Requirements” for requirements pertaining to training. B. Mechanical Contractor. The mechanical contractor shall have the following training responsibilities: 1. Provide the CxA with a training plan two (2) weeks before the planned training. 2. Provide designated Owner personnel with comprehensive orientation and training in the understanding of the systems and the operation and maintenance of each piece of HVAC equipment including, but not limited to, all HVAC equipment (ex. pumps, chillers, heat rejection equipment, air conditioning units, air handling units, fans, etc.) 3. Training shall normally start with classroom sessions followed by hands-on training on each piece of equipment, which shall illustrate the various modes of operation, including startup, shutdown, fire/smoke alarm, power failure, etc. 4. During any demonstration, should the system fail to perform in accordance with the requirements of the O&M manual or sequence of operations, the system will be repaired or adjusted as necessary and the demonstration repeated. 5. The appropriate trade or manufacturer’s representative shall provide the instructions on each major piece of equipment. This person may be the start-up technician for the piece of equipment, the installing contractor or manufacturer’s representative. Practical building operating expertise as well as in-depth knowledge of all modes of operation of the specific piece of equipment are required. More than one party may be required to execute the training. 6. The training sessions shall follow the outline in the Table of Contents of the operation and maintenance manual and illustrate whenever possible the use of the O&M manuals for reference. 7. Training shall include: a. Use of the printed installation, operation and maintenance instruction material included in the O&M manuals. b. A review of the written O&M instructions emphasizing safe and proper operating requirements, preventative maintenance, special tools needed and spare parts inventory suggestions. The training shall include start.up, operation in all modes possible, shut-down, seasonal changeover and any emergency procedures. c. Discussion of relevant health and safety issues and concerns. d. Discussion of warranties and guarantees. e. Common troubleshooting problems and solutions. f. Explanatory information included in the O&M manuals and the location of all plans and manuals in the facility. g. Discussion of any peculiarities of equipment installation or operation. h. The format and training agenda in The HVAC Commissioning Process, ASHRAE Guideline 1-2007, is recommended. 8. Hands-on training shall include start-up, operation in all modes possible, including manual, shut-down and any emergency procedures and preventative maintenance for all pieces of equipment. 9. The mechanical contractor shall fully explain and demonstrate the operation, function and overrides of any local packaged controls, not controlled by the central control system. 10. Training shall occur after functional testing is complete, unless approved otherwise by the Owner. C. TAB. The TAB contractor shall have the following training responsibilities: 1. TAB shall meet for with facility staff after completion of TAB and instruct them on the following: a. Go over the final TAB report, explaining the layout and meanings of each data type. b. Discuss any outstanding deficient items in control, ducting or design that may affect the proper delivery of air or water. c. Identify and discuss any duct runs, diffusers, coils, fans and pumps that are close to or are not meeting their design capacity. d. Discuss any temporary settings and steps to finalize them for any areas that are not finished. e. Other salient information that may be useful for facility operations, relative to TAB. END OF SECTION 23 0800 SECTION 23 0900 -AUTOMATIC CONTROLS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.01 GENERAL REQUIREMENT A. All work specified herein shall be accomplished in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section 23 00 00 -HVAC General. B. Furnish and install a complete system of automatic controls of the type and characteristics and which will perform the functions described herein and on the Drawings. C. All equipment, labor, tubing, etc. required to accomplish the control sequences outlined in this section shall be furnished as part of the HVAC work. D. All other HVAC equipment purchased and installed as described in other sections of these specifications shall be coordinated with the requirements of this section to assure compatibility and function. E. All electrical control wiring required as part of this work shall be furnished and installed as part of the HVAC work and shall be installed in accordance with Division 26. F. This section generally describes the desired operating sequence and characteristics of all HVAC systems provided and installed as part of Division 23 of these specifications.  The preparation of the detailed control schematics necessary to accomplish the desired systems operation shall be included as part of the HVAC work.  Electronic files (e.g. PDFs, etc.) of these control schematics shall be submitted and reviewed by the Engineer as part of the Submittal Phase and prior to the purchase or installation of any control equipment or other equipment that depends on these control schemes for proper operation. G. Mount top of thermostats and sensors at 46" AFF unless noted otherwise. Provide clear locking guard assemblies for all public area thermostats. Coordinate thermostat locations with all trades. Coordinate final locations with the general contractor, interior designer and the owner prior to installation. Locate adjacent to light switches where possible. Do not locate thermostats at the center or near center of a wall. Thermostats shall be mounted no closer than 8" from the corner or end of a wall or door. All thermostats shall be ADA compliant. H. All major control equipment shall be located in a suitable enclosure in the Mechanical Room. 1.02 CODES AND REFERENCES A. National Fire Protection Association – 90A, 90B, 92 B. ASHRAE Standards 1.03 SUBMITTALS A. Product Requirements:  Provide electronic copies (or PDF) of shop drawings and other submittals on hardware, software, and equipment to be installed or furnished.  Indicate dimensions, capacities, performance characteristics, electrical characteristics, finishes for materials, and installation and startup instructions for each type of product indicated.  Begin no work until submittals have been approved for conformity with design intent. When manufacturer's cut sheets apply to a product series rather than a specific product, clearly indicate applicable data by highlighting or by other means.  Clearly reference covered specification and drawing on each submittal.  General catalogs shall not be accepted as cut sheets to fulfill submittal requirements.  Select and show submittal quantities appropriate to scope of work.  Submittal approval does not relieve Contractor of responsibility to supply sufficient quantities to complete work.  Provide submittals on the following: 1. Wiring diagrams and layouts for each control panel. Show termination numbers. 2. Manufacturer's description and technical data such as performance curves, product specifications, and installation and maintenance instructions for items listed and for relevant items not listed: Control panels, Thermostats, sensors, and Operator interface equipment. 3. Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Manuals 4. Stair/Elevator hoistway pressurization system controls including Fire Fighter’s Smoke Control Panel. Include wiring and layout diagrams and product data. Jordan & Skala Engineers AUTOMATIC CONTROLS 23 0900 -1 1.04 MANUFACTURERS A. Acceptable manufacturers/installers for automatic controls:  Johnson Controls, Siemens, Automated Logic, Honeywell, American Auto-Matrix, Alerton, Distech Controls, Schneider Electric, Carrier, or Trane. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.01 GENERAL A. Only those products of particular importance to appearance or function are described in this Products section.  Other items required for satisfactory systems operation but not herein described shall be furnished and installed to meet the intent and Operating Sequences herein described. 2.02 PROGRAM CLOCK OVER-RIDES A. Program clock over-rides shall be manual time switches for flush wall mounting, Mark-Time 90102, 0-3 hours. B. Units shall be mounted 4'-0" AFF where shown on the Drawings. C. Over-ride switches shall be provided for each air handling system.  Override switches for HVAC units shall be located adjacent to area thermostats.  Override switches for other equipment shall be as shown on the Drawings. 2.03 AUTOMATIC CONTROL DAMPERS A. Dampers shall be of the opposed blade low leakage type with polyurethane blade seals and stainless-steel jamb seals. B. Leakage shall not exceed 1% of full air flow at 4" WG and below (based on 1,500 FPM approach velocity). C. Units shall be full size of ductwork with duct mounting flanges as shown on the Drawings. D. Dampers shall be manufactured by Ruskin, Greenheck or equal with required operators. 2.04 AUTOMATIC SHUTDOWN OF RECIRCULATING AIR SYSTEMS A. All fans supplying more than 2,000 cfm of air to any space and all recirculating fan systems serving areas of egress shall be installed with a smoke detector in the supply [return] ductwork.  Duct smoke detectors shall be installed in the return air path of air distribution systems utilizing a common supply and/or return air plenum with a combined design capacity greater than 2,000 cfm. B. The smoke detector shall be wired to stop the fan upon detection of smoke and signal the building fire alarm control panel.  The smoke detector shall be furnished by the Electrical Contractor, mounted in the duct by the HVAC Contractor, and wired by the Electrical Contractor. C. The smoke detector shall cause a visible and audible alarm signal in a normally occupied area. Smoke detector trouble conditions shall be identified as air duct detector trouble.  The smoke detector and audible/visible alarm shall be furnished and installed by the HVAC Contractor. D. Firestats may be substituted for smoke detectors in “A” above if permitted by local code authority.  Firestats shall otherwise be installed as required by local code authorities. 2.05 HVAC EMERGENCY SHUTDOWN A. Manual over-ride control (emergency shut-down) switch for all HVAC units shall be located in a locking cover adjacent to the fire alarm annunciator panel or other location approved by the authority having jurisdiction. B. Provide motor starter(s) with auxiliary contactor to accomplish Item A above. 2.06 CARBON DIOXIDE SENSORS FOR HIGH DENSITY SPACES A. Carbon dioxide sensors shall be located in high density areas (where occupied spaces greater than 24/1000 per ASRHAE 62.1-2010) to monitor the space CO2 level. Audio alarm shall be generated. B. Co2 sensors shall be space or duct mounted carbon dioxide sensors as required by the application.  Space CO2 sensors shall be mounted next to space temperature sensors.  The Jordan & Skala Engineers AUTOMATIC CONTROLS 23 0900 -2 sensor shall have a range of 0-2000 ppm with an accuracy of ±5%.  The response time for the sensor shall be less than one minute.  The sensor shall be capable of providing an analog signal proportional to the CO2 level sensed.  The signal shall be either 0-10 Vdc or 4-20mA. 2.07 SMOKE CONTROL SYSTEMS A. All fans, dampers, and other HVAC equipment that is part of a smoke evacuation or smoke management system (including stair and elevator pressurization systems) shall be monitored and controlled by a UL 864 UUKL Listed Firefighter’s Smoke Control Panel (FSCP) as manufactured by Delta, Gamewell, Simplex Grinnell, Siemens or approved equal.  At a minimum, the FSCP shall include manual control or override of automatic control for mechanical smoke control systems. Panel size and capacity shall be as required by the number of smoke control points.  The FSCP shall be located in the Fire Command Center. 1. All fans within the building shall be graphically depicted on the panel face with direction of air flow and relationship to system components shown. 2. Status indictors shall be provided for all smoke control equipment, annunciated by fan and zone and by LED pilot lamp-type indicators as follows: a. Fans, dampers and other operating equipment in their normal status – White. b. Fans, dampers and other operating equipment in their off or closed status – Red. c. Fans, dampers and other operating equipment in their on or open status – Green. d. Fans, dampers and other operating equipment in a fault status – Yellow/Amber. 3. The FSCP shall provide control capability over the complete smoke control system equipment within the building as follows: a. On-Off-Auto control over each individual piece of operating smoke control equipment that can also be controlled from other sources within the building. This includes stairway pressurization fans; smoke exhaust fans; supply, return and exhaust fans; air handling units, elevator hoistway pressurization fans and other operating equipment used or intended for smoke control purposes. b. Open-Auto-Close control over individual dampers relating to smoke control and that they are also controlled from other sources within the building. c. On-Off or Open-Close control over smoke control and other critical equipment associated with a fire or smoke emergency and that can be controlled from other sources within the building. B. Stair and elevator pressurization fans shall be provided with a duct smoke detector in the airstream that shall annunciate a supervisory signal on the FSCP and shall illuminate a lamp adjacent to the fan status indicator. A manual override for each fan shall also be provided. Fans shall not shut off until manually overridden by fire department personnel or until the fire alarm system is reset. The FSCP shall also indicate that air is moving in each pressurization system. Monitoring of air flow shall be accomplished with differential pressure across the fan. The VFD shall not fail to a greater capacity than that associated with the control setpoint for the fan. The duct detector shall be furnished by the Electrical Contractor, mounted by the Mechanical Contractor and wired by the Electrical Contractor. 1. Stair and elevator pressurization shall be controlled by an active compensated pressure control system (one system for each stair/hoistway). The master control unit shall collect all inputs and maintain a user configurable pressure within the stair/elevator by modulating the supply air fan motor speed and independently modulating the roof mounted relief damper in response to pressure readings. Supply air shall be introduced into the stairwell at multiple injection points with a fast response motorized damper at each injection point. Injection point dampers shall be modulated via an injection point monitor and regulator controller receiving input from bi-directional pressure sensor(s). a. The controllers shall be UL 864 listed, Standard for Control Units and Accessories for Fire Alarm Systems. b. Controller manufacturer: LFSystems Model L864 c. Standard features: 1) 7” Color Touchscreen Interface Jordan & Skala Engineers AUTOMATIC CONTROLS 23 0900 -3 2) Adjustable system parameters 3) Smoke damper control and monitoring 4) Smoke detector monitoring 5) Supply air fan control and monitoring 6) Pressure control damper control 7) High and Low Pressure Warnings 8) Three (3) selectable analog 0-10VDC inputs for zone pressure sensors 9) Dedicated inputs & relay contact outputs for FSCP interface 10) Dedicated system enable input for Fire Alarm Control Panel (FACP) interface d. Communication: Modbus RTU RS485 Serial protocol supported e. Required accessories: 1) Bi-directional pressure sensor to monitor up to two floors; Model LP4 with wall port plate; Model WPP 2) Outdoor static pressure sensor; Model ZPS 3) Current sensing relay for pressurization fan; Model CS75 4) Injection point damper: fast acting (2 second) actuator, opposed blade damper; Model IPD 5) Injection point regulator controller to control the IPD; Model L850 6) Opposed blade relief damper with fast acting (2 second) actuator 2.08 DAMPER ACTUATORS FOR LIFE SAFETY SYSTEMS A. This includes actuators controlling dampers for life safety systems, but not limited to generator ventilation and cooling, elevator hoistway relief, etc. B. Actuators shall be powered closed and spring operated to fail open upon loss of power. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.01 OPERATING SEQUENCE A. All units and systems shall be controlled as described on the Drawings and as recommended by equipment manufacturers. END OF SECTION 23 0900 Jordan & Skala Engineers AUTOMATIC CONTROLS 23 0900 -4 SECTION 23 0920 -VARIABLE FREQUENCY DRIVES PART 1 -GENERAL 1.01 DESCRIPTION A. All work specified herein shall be accomplished in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section 23 00 00 -HVAC General. B. This specification is to cover a complete variable frequency motor drive (VFD) consisting of a pulse width modulated (PWM) inverter for use on a standard NEMA Design B induction motor. 1.02 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Referenced Standards 1. Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) 2. Standard 519-Latest Edition, IEEE Recommended Practice and Requirements for Harmonic Control in Electric Power Systems 3. Underwriters Laboratories Inc. a. UL 508C 4. National Electrical Manufacturer’s Association (NEMA) a. ISC 6, Enclosures for Industrial Controls and Systems b. ISC 7.0, AC Adjustable 5. IEC 16800 Parts 1 and 2 B. Qualifications 1. VFDs shall be UL Listed. 2. VFDs shall be CUL Listed or CSA Approved. C. VFD shall be manufactured in an ISO 9002 certified facility. D. VFD shall be manufactured in accordance with ISO 14001 (Environmental Management Standard). E. VFD shall meet the following vibration test standards: IEC 60068-2-29; 60068-2-64; 60068-2-6. 1.03 SUBMITTALS A. Submittals shall include the following information: 1. Outline dimensions 2. Weight 1.04 WARRANTY A. Warranty shall be 24 months from the date of certified start-up, not to exceed 30 months from the date of shipment. The warranty shall include all parts, labor, travel time, and expenses. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.01 ADJUSTABLE FREQUENCY DRIVES A. Manufacturers 1. Drives and all necessary controls, as herein specified shall be supplied by the drive manufacturer. Manufacturer shall have been engaged in the production of this type of equipment for a minimum of ten (10) years. 2. All drives on the project shall be by the same manufacturer. 3. Acceptable Manufacturers shall be: ABB, Emerson, Danfoss, Yaskawa, Siemens, Eaton or Square D. B. General 1. Drives shall be designed specifically for variable torque applications.  2. The adjustable frequency drives shall be solid state, with a Pulse Width Modulated (PWM) output waveform. 3. The VFD package as specified herein shall be enclosed in a NEMA 1 enclosure (unless located outdoors; a NEMA 3R enclosure shall be furnished), completely assembled and tested by the manufacturer. The VFD shall employ a full wave rectifier (to prevent input line notching), DC Line Reactor, capacitors, and Insulated Gate Bipolar Transistors (IGBTs) as the output switching device, or the VFD shall consist of Matrix technology, where the input power stage converts three phase AC line power directly into variable AC output. The Main circuit shall consist of a compact input filter and bidirectional IGBT’s. The bidirectional switches are input devices that carry the full current of the drive. 4. The drive efficiency shall be 97% or better at full speed and full load. Fundamental power factor shall be 0.98 at all speeds and loads. C. Specifications for the 1 HP to 400 HP (550 HP w/o bypass) VFD at 480 Volts and 1 to 100 HP VFD at 230 Volts: 1. Input 440/460/480/500 VAC +/-10% (capable of operation to 624 VAC), 3-phase, 48 -63 Hz or Input 208/220/230/240 VAC +/-10%, 3-phase, 48 -63 Hz. 2. Output 0 -Input Voltage, 3-phase, 0 to 500 Hz for drives up to 75 HP; 0 to 120 Hz for drives over 75 HP. Operation above 60 Hz. shall require programming changes to prevent inadvertent high-speed operation. 3. Environmental operating conditions: 14 to 120.F (-10 to 50. C) @ 3 kHz switching frequency, 0 to 3,300 feet above sea level, less than 95% humidity, non-condensing. 4. Enclosure shall be rated UL Type 1. D. All VFDs shall have the following standard features: 1. All VFDs shall have the same customer interface, including digital display, keypad and customer connections; regardless of horsepower rating. The keypad is to be used for local control, for setting all parameters, and for stepping through the displays and menus. 2. The VFD shall give the user the option of either 1) displaying a fault, 2) running at a programmable preset speed, 3) hold the VFD speed based on the last reference received, or 4) cause a Warning to be issued, if the input reference (4.20mA or 2-10V) is lost; as selected by the user. The VFD shall provide a programmable relay output for customer use to indicate the loss of reference condition. 3. The VFDs shall utilize plain English digital display (code numbers and letters are not acceptable). The LCD shall be backlit to provide easy viewing in any light condition. The contrast should be adjustable to optimize viewing at any angle. All set-up parameters, indications, faults, warnings and other information must be displayed in words to allow the user to understand what is being displayed without the use of a manual or cross-reference table. Keypad shall have a built-in time clock capable of month, day and time stamping faults. 4. The VFDs shall utilize pre-programmed application macros specifically designed to facilitate start-up. The Application Macros shall provide one command to reprogram all parameters and customer interfaces for a particular application to reduce programming time. 5. The VFD shall have the ability to automatically restart after an overcurrent, overvoltage, under voltage, or loss of input signal protective trip. The number of restart attempts, trial time, and time between reset attempts shall be programmable. If the time between reset attempts is greater than zero, the time remaining until reset occurs shall count down on the display to warn an operator that a restart will occur. 6. The VFD shall be capable of starting into a rotating load (forward or reverse) and accelerate or decelerate to setpoint without safety tripping or component damage (flying start). 7. The VFD shall be equipped with an automatic extended power loss ride-through circuit which will utilize the inertia of the load to keep the drive powered.  Minimum power loss ride-through shall be one-cycle, based on full load and no inertia. Removing power from the motor is not an acceptable method of increasing power loss ride-through. 8. The customer terminal strip shall be isolated from the line and ground. 9. Pre-wired 3-position Hand-Off-Auto switch and speed potentiometer. When in “Hand,” the VFD will be started, and the speed will be controlled from the speed potentiometer. When in “Off,” the VFD will be stopped. When in “Auto,” the VFD will start via an external contact closure, and its speed will be controlled via an external speed reference. 10. The drive shall employ the following 3 current limit circuits to provide trip free operation: a. The Slow Current Regulation limit circuit shall be adjustable to 130% (minimum) of the VFDs variable torque current rating. This adjustment shall be made via the keypad, and shall be displayed in actual amps, and not as percent of full load. b. The Rapid Current Regulation limit shall be adjustable to 170% (minimum) of the VFDs variable torque current rating. c. The Current Switch-off limit shall be fixed at 175% (minimum, instantaneous) of the VFDs variable torque current rating. 11. The overload rating of the drive shall be 110% of its variable torque current rating for 1 minute every 10 minutes, and 130% of its variable torque current rating for 2 seconds every 60 seconds. 12. The VFD shall have input line fuses or circuit breakers standard in the drive enclosure. 13. The VFD shall have a DC Line Reactor to reduce the harmonics to the power line and to increase the fundamental power factor. Dual DC link chokes may be utilized as an acceptable alternate. 14. The VFD shall be optimized for a 4 kHz carrier frequency to reduce motor noise and provide high system efficiency. Carrier frequency shall be selectable for 1, 2, 4, 8, 10, or 12 kHz. 15. The VFD shall include a fireman’s override input. This mode shall override all other control modes (analog, digital, serial and keypad commands) and the motor shall run at the preprogrammed speed. The keypad shall display “Override Mode” status. Upon removal of the override signal, normal operation shall be resumed. E. All VFDs shall have the following adjustments: 1. Three (3) programmable critical frequency lockout ranges to prevent the VFD from continuously operating at an unstable speed. 2. PI Setpoint controller shall be standard in the drive, allowing a pressure or flow signal to be connected to the VFD, using the microprocessor in the VFD for the closed loop control. 3. Two (2) programmable analog inputs shall accept a current or voltage signal for speed reference or for reference and actual (feedback) signals for PI controller. Analog inputs shall include a filter; programmable from 0.01 to 10 seconds to remove any oscillation in the input signal. The minimum and maximum values (gain and offset) shall be adjustable within the range of 0 -20 mA and 0 -10 Volts. Additionally, the reference must be able to be scaled so that maximum reference can represent a frequency less than 60 Hz, without lowering the drive maximum frequency below 60 Hz. 4. Six (6) programmable digital inputs for maximum flexibility in interfacing with external devices. One (1) digital input is to be utilized as a customer safety connection point for fire, freeze, and smoke interlocks (Enable). Upon remote, customer reset (reclosure of interlock), drive is to resume normal operation. 5. Two (2) programmable analog outputs proportional to Frequency, Motor Speed, Output Voltage, Output Current, Motor Torque, Motor Power (kW), DC Bus voltage, or Active Reference. 6. Three (3) programmable digital relay outputs. The relays shall be rated for maximum switching current 8 amps at 24 VDC and 0.4 amps at 250 VAC; Maximum voltage 300 VDC and 250 VAC; Continuous current rating 2 amps RMS. Outputs must be true form C type contacts; open collector outputs are not acceptable. 7. Seven (7) programmable preset speeds. 8. Two (2) independently adjustable accel and decel ramps. These ramp times shall be adjustable from 1 to 1,800 seconds. 9. The VFD shall Ramp or Coast to a stop, as selected by the user. F. The following operating information displays shall be standard on the VFD digital display. The display shall be in complete English words (alpha-numeric codes are not acceptable). 1. Output Frequency 2. Motor Speed (RPM, % or Engineering units) 3. Motor Current 4. Calculated Motor Torque 5. Calculated Motor Power 6. DC Bus Voltage 7. Output Voltage 8. Heatsink Temperature 9. Analog Input Values 10. Keypad Reference Values 11. Elapsed Time Meter 12. kWh meter G. The VFD shall have the following protection circuits. In the case of a protective trip, the drive shall stop, and announce the fault condition in complete words (alpha-numeric codes are not acceptable). 1. Overcurrent trip 175% instantaneous of the VFDs variable torque current rating. 2. Overvoltage trip 130% of the VFDs rated voltage 3. Under voltage trip 65% of the VFDs rated voltage 4. Over temperature +176-194.F (+80-90.C) 5. Ground Fault either running or at start 6. Adaptable Electronic Motor Overload (I2t). The Electronic Motor Overload protection shall protect the motor based on speed, load curve, and external fan parameter. Circuits which are not speed dependent are unacceptable. The electronic motor overload protection shall be UL Listed for this function. H. Speed Command Input shall be via: 1. Keypad. 2. Two (2) analog inputs, each capable of accepting a 0-20mA, 4-20mA, 0-10V, 2.10V signal. Input shall be isolated from ground, and programmable via the keypad for different uses. 3. Analog inputs shall have a programmable filter to remove any oscillation of the reference signal. The filter shall be adjustable from 0.01 to 10 seconds. The analog input should be able to be inverted, so that minimum reference corresponds to maximum speed, and maximum reference corresponds to minimum speed. The minimum and maximum values (gain and offset) shall be adjustable within the range of 0 -20 mA and 0 -10 Volts. The active analog input shall have loss of reference protection, if selected. 4. Floating point input shall accept a 3-wire input from a Dwyer Photohelic (or equivalent type) instrument. I. Serial Communications 1. The VFD shall have embedded Modbus RTU, BACnet, Siemens FLN and Johnson Metasys N2 protocols as standard for building automation systems network communications accessible via a RS-485 port. 2. Optional protocols shall include LonWorks, and Ethernet. 3. The VFD shall be able to communicate with PLCs, DCSs, and DDCs. 4. Serial communication capabilities shall include, but not be limited to, run-stop control, speed set adjustment, proportional/integral PI controller adjustments, current limit, and accel/decel time adjustments. The drive shall have the capability of allowing the Building Automation System (BAS) to monitor feedback such as output speed/frequency, current (in amps), % torque, % power, kilowatt hours, relay outputs, and diagnostic fault information. J. Accessories to be Furnished and Mounted by the Drive Manufacturer 1. Customer Interlock Terminal Strip -provide a separate terminal strip for connection of freeze, fire, smoke contacts, and external start command. All external interlocks and start/stop contacts shall remain fully functional whether the drive is in Hand, Auto or Bypass. 2. All wires to be individually numbered at both ends for ease of troubleshooting. 3. Door interlocked thermal magnetic circuit breaker which will disconnect all input power from the drive and all internally mounted options. The disconnect handle shall be thru-the-door type, and be padlockable in the “Off” position. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.01 INSTALLATION A. Installation shall be the responsibility of the mechanical contractor. The contractor shall install the drive in accordance with the recommendations of the VFD manufacturer as outlined in the installation manual. B. The manufacturer must ensure that the installed THD is less than 5%. Should the voltage THD exceed 5%, the VFD manufacturer is to recommend the additional equipment required to reduce the voltage THD to an acceptable level. C. Power wiring shall be completed by the electrical contractor. The contractor shall complete all wiring in accordance with the recommendations of the VFD manufacturer as outlined in the installation manual. 1. VFD rated shielded cabling shall be provided between the drive and the motor. D. When 6 pulse drives are used, provide dv/dt filters when the VFD is between 100 and 300 feet from the motor and provide sine wave filters when the VFD is over 300 feet from the motor. 3.02 START-UP A. Certified factory start-up shall be provided for each drive by a factory authorized service center. A certified start-up form shall be filled out for each drive with a copy provided to the Owner, and a copy kept on file at the manufacturer. 3.03 TRAINING A. The manufacturer shall provide on-site training for the Owner’s maintenance personnel for a period of not less than four (4) hours. Training shall be provided for each different type of drive. END OF SECTION 23 0920 SECTION 23 2300 -REFRIGERANT PIPING, INSULATION AND ACCESSORIES PART 1 -GENERAL 1.01 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS A. All work specified herein shall be accomplished in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section 23 00 00 -HVAC General B. Refrigerant piping shall meet the requirements of the Safety Standard for Refrigeration Systems (ANSI/ASHRAE Standard 15-Latest Edition) and the Code for Pressure Piping (ANSI/ASME Standard B31.5-Latest Edition: Refrigeration Piping and Heat Transfer Components). C. Piping, valves, accessories, and insulation installed indoors shall have a flame-spread index of 25 or less, and smoke-developed index of 50 or less. D. VOC Content: Submit adhesive and sealants product information or MSDS showing VOC content information for all applicable products specified under this section. All applicable products in this section must meet low VOC content as specified by LEED Specification Section 01 81 16: Facility Environmental Requirements. All work performed under this specification shall be accomplished in accordance with the requirements and provisions of the following sections: 1.Section 01 81 13 Sustainable Design Requirements 2.Section 01 81 16 Facility Environmental Requirements 3.Section 01 81 19 Indoor Air Quality Requirements 4.Section 01 91 00 Commissioning 1.02 WORK INCLUDED A. The work under this section shall include all labor, materials, accessories, services, and equipment necessary to furnish and install all refrigerant piping, insulating systems, and accessories, complete, as indicated and specified herein. B. Without limiting the generality thereof, the work in this section shall include the following items: 1. Direct expansion (DX) system piping (cooling only and heat pump) 2. Variable Refrigerant Flow/Variable Refrigerant Volume (VRF/VRV) system piping 3. Insulating the following systems: a. Refrigerant suction (low pressure gas) piping b. Refrigerant hot gas (discharge or high-pressure gas) piping. c. Refrigerant liquid piping for VRF/VRV and Heat Pump systems. d. Refrigerant liquid piping for ductless split systems 1.03 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Specification sections: 1. 23 81 28 Split System Heat Pumps 2. 23 81 28.12 Ductless Cooling Only Split Systems 3. 23 81 28.13 Ductless Split System Heat Pumps 4. 23 81 29 Variable Refrigerant Flow HVAC Systems 1.04 RELATED REFERENCES A. Designation and Safety Classification of Refrigerants (ANSI/ASHRAE Standard 34-Latest Edition). 1.05 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Installer Qualification: Only trained and experienced installers skilled in refrigeration pipe installation and brazing of copper tubing shall be used. B. Piping, valves, and accessories shall be manufactured in the United States. Submit Certificate of Manufacture with shop drawings. 1.06 SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For each type of valve and refrigerant piping specialty indicated. Include pressure drop based on manufacturer's test data. Jordan & Skala Engineers INSULATION AND ACCESSORIES REFRIGERANT PIPING, 23 2300 -1 B. Shop Drawings: Show layout of refrigerant piping and specialties, including pipe, tube, and fitting sizes, valve arrangements and locations, wall and floor penetrations, and equipment connection details. Show interface and spatial relationships between piping and equipment. 1. Refrigerant piping indicated on Drawings is schematic only. Size piping and design actual piping layout, including specialties, and pipe and tube sizes to accommodate, as a minimum, equipment provided, elevation difference between compressor and evaporator, and length of piping to ensure proper operation and compliance with warranties of connected equipment. C. Piping materials including Certificate of Manufacture D. Insulation products, adhesives, coatings, etc. including Material Safety Data Sheets E. Field quality-control test reports F. Operation and maintenance data 1.07 PRODUCT STORAGE AND HANDLING A. Store piping, insulation, valves, and specialties in a clean and protected area. B. Piping, tubes, and coils shall be stored with end caps in place to ensure that piping interior and exterior remain clean prior to installation. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.01 REFRIGERANT PIPING A. Piping shall be: 1. Type “L” hard drawn seamless copper tube conforming to ASTM B88, or 2. Type “ACR” (Air Conditioning and Refrigeration) service copper tubing conforming to ASTM B280. a. Straight Lengths:  ASTM B 75, UNS C12200, H55 Temper (Light Drawn), ACR Bending Quality; Cleaned, Eddy Current Tested, and Plugged per ASTM B 280. b. Coiled: ASTM B 280, UNS C12200, O60 Temper (Soft Annealed), ACR, cleaned and capped. Coils shall be dehydrated, purged with Nitrogen, and tightly capped to insure cleanliness. Piping shall be engineered and constructed to support R-410A to 700 psi @ 250°F. 1) Acceptable manufacturers: a) Streamline/Mueller b) Reftekk, Inc. c) Linesets, Inc. d) ACR Green Proshield by Select Manufacturing, Inc. e) JMF Company B. Joints shall be brazed. Brazing filler metals shall comply with AWS A5.8. Mechanical press type joints are not allowed. 2.02 VALVES, FITTINGS AND SPECIALTIES A. Fittings shall be wrought copper conforming to ASME/ANSI Standard B16. B. Valves, filter-driers, and other accessories shall be suitable for refrigerant service. C. Field Swaged Brazing Cups:  MSS-SP-73, ASME B 16.50 D. Field Bends (all angles):  ASME B31.5 E. Full Port Refrigeration Service Valves: 1. Body: Forged brass uni-body style with brass cap including key end to remove core 2. Schrader service valve with cap 3. Core:  Removable ball-type check valve with stainless-steel spring 4. Seat:  Polytetrafluoroethylene Jordan & Skala Engineers INSULATION AND ACCESSORIES REFRIGERANT PIPING, 23 2300 -2 5. End Connections:  Socket ends 6. Working Pressure Rating: 700 psig (factory tested) 7. Maximum Operating Temperature 300°F 8. Valves must be specifically rated for R-410A 9. Approved manufacturers: Diamondback, Parker, Mueller/Streamline 2.03 INSULATION A. Refrigerant piping shall be insulated as follows: 1. Refrigerant Piping Installed Outdoors: shall be insulated with flexible elastomeric tubing insulation with factory applied UV resistant durable protective jacket, Armaflex ShieldTM continuous coil pipe insulation as manufactured by Armacell, LLC or alternates listed below, when the product is available in the required pipe size and insulation wall thickness (k-factor: 0.25 hr•ft.•°F/Btu (m.•°C/W) at 75°F (24°C) mean temperature). Polyethylene (PE) insulation is not acceptable. No field applied protective coating or finish shall be used with this insulation. Longitudinal and butt joints shall be sealed per manufacturer’s installation instructions. a. Acceptable alternate elastomeric product: 1) K-Flex USA; K-Flex TitanTM (k-factor: 0.23 hr•ft.•°F/Btu (m.•°C/W) at 75°F (24°C) mean temperature). 2. Refrigerant Piping Installed Indoors: shall be insulated with flexible elastomeric tubing insulation, AP/Armaflex Black LapSealTM pipe insulation as manufactured by Armacell, LLC or alternates listed below (k-factor: 0.245-0.28 hr•ft.•°F/Btu (m.•°C/W) at 75°F (24°C) mean temperature). Polyethylene (PE) insulation is not acceptable. All joints and seams shall be sealed weathertight with Armaflex Black LapSealTM Tape. Black LapSealTM Tape shall also be used to secure the thermostat cable to the pipe insulation prior to applying the finish coat. The finish coat for this flexible elastomeric insulation when installed outdoors shall be two coats of a water-based latex paint designed for use over all forms of flexible elastomeric insulation. Finish coat shall provide a protective finish suitable to both indoor and outdoor applications, formulated for cold weather flexibility to resist cracking and weather-resistant to ultraviolet (UV) and ozone. Coating shall be Armaflex WB finish or equivalent product compatible with the insulation. a. Acceptable alternate products: 1) Aeroflex, USA, Inc.; Aerocell-SSPTTM (k-factor: 0.245hr•ft.•°F/Btu (m.•°C/W) at 75°F (24°C) mean temperature) with Protape and two coats of field applied Aerocel Aerocoat. (Aerocel Aerocoat required for outdoor installation only). 2) K-Flex USA, LLC., K-Flex Insul-Lock DS (k-factor: 0.245 hr•ft.•°F/Btu (m.•°C/W) at 75°F (24°C) mean temperature) (indoor use only). 3. Fittings, valves, and specialties shall be insulated with factory formed sectional units of the materials listed above. 4. Insulation that is outdoors and not directly exposed to sunlight (i.e., piping is enclosed in a prefabricated duct system) does not require the UV protective coating. 5. Valves and specialties shall be provided with a factory insulation package fabricated from materials listed above. 6. Insulating systems above are to be considered as a minimum. Air conditioning system manufacturer’s recommendations take precedence over the insulation materials listed above. Submit air conditioning manufacturer’s installation instructions and insulation product data for review and approval. B. Insulation thickness shall be as follows: 1. VRF/VRV Heat Pump and Heat Recovery Systems -Insulate all piping: Jordan & Skala Engineers INSULATION AND ACCESSORIES REFRIGERANT PIPING, 23 2300 -3 Camden Gulch Camden  HASTINGS Project #21128 Construction Documents 2023.04.03  (Note that some ductless split systems and multi-split systems may operate at these temperatures. Verify operating temperatures with the manufacturer)  VRF/VRV Refrigerant Piping Systems  REFRIGERANT CONDITION or PHASE  REFRIGERAN T TEMPERATU RE RANGE (°F)  INSULATION MEAN RATING TEMPERATU RE (°F)  ACR TUBING OUTSIDE DIAMETER  1/4”  3/8”  1/2”  5/8”  3/4”  7/8”  1-1/8”  1-3/8”  1-5/8”  INSULATION THICKNESS REQUIRED (INCHES)  HIGH PRESS VAPOR  141-200  125  1.1/2”  1.1/2”  1.1/2”  1.1/2”  1.1/2”  1.1/2”  1.1/2”  1.1/2”  2”  LIQUID  105-140  100  1”  1”  1”  1”  1”  1”  1”  1”  1.1/2”  LOW PRESSURE VAPOR  40-60  75  1/2”  1/2”  1/2”  1/2”  1/2”  1/2”  1/2”  1/2”  1”  BELOW 40  50  1”  1”  1”  1”  1”  1”  1.1/2”  1.1/2”  1.1/2”  NOTE: FOR PIPING SMALLER THAN 1-1/2 INCHES AND LOCATED IN PARTITIONS WITHIN CONDITIONED SPACES, REDUCTION OF THESE THICKNESSES BY 1 INCH SHALL BE PERMITTED, BUT NOT TO THICKNESSES BELOW 1 INCH.  1. Traditional Heat Pump Split Systems (TXV located at indoor unit) –Insulate suction piping only: a. <1-1/2" pipe 1" insulation b. 1-1/2"<4" pipe 1-1/2" insulation 2. Mini-Split Cooling Only (TXV located at outdoor unit) – Insulate all piping – 1" insulation 3. Mini-Split Heat Pump (TXV located at outdoor unit) – Insulate all piping – 1" insulation PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.01 GENERAL A. Refrigerant piping shall be supported as shown on the Drawings and as required at intervals not over 8'-0" O.C. and at all turns and offsets. Hangers and pipe clamps shall be copper plated tubing hangers of adequate size to fit around tubing and insulation as required. Saddles shall be used under insulated tubing to protect insulation. Piping routed more than 6 (six) lineal feet on the roof shall be supported by B-Line “Dura-Blok” rooftop supports or approved equal. B. Pressure testing of piping systems shall be in accordance with standard industry practice for the refrigerant used. C. Refrigerant piping shall be clean and free of outside contaminants at all times. Prior to start-up of any equipment or insulation installation, all piping shall be cleaned, tested, dehydrated and charged as recommended by the refrigerant compressor manufacturer. 1. Procedure: Joints and connections in refrigerant piping shall not be installed in partitions or walls or where inaccessible for testing, inspection and rework. Make provisions to prevent contact of dissimilar metals. During construction, cap all tubing to prevent moisture from entering.  Keep in dry location. Jordan & Skala Engineers INSULATION AND ACCESSORIES REFRIGERANT PIPING, 23 2300 -4 2. Leak testing and recharging: Upon completion of installation of air conditioning equipment, test all refrigerant piping, components and accessories, including quick-connect refrigerant connectors for evaporator and condensing unit; test with a halide torch; prove tight by Contractor to assure a leak-tight refrigerant system. If leaks are detected at the time of installation or during warranty period, remove entire refrigerant charge from system, correct leaks, and retest system. After system is found to be leak free, evacuation shall be accomplished by use of a reliable gauge and a vacuum pump capable of pulling vacuum of at least one mm Hg absolute. Accomplish system evacuation in strict accordance with equipment manufacturer’s printed instruction. System leak testing, evacuation, dehydration and charging with refrigerant shall comply with standard industry practice and local codes and ordinances. D. Refrigerant piping shall be run continuously, without joints, where possible. All joints in refrigerant piping shall be made accessible. Joints shall not be permitted in concrete slabs or below grade. E. Refrigerant circuit access ports located outdoors shall be fitted with locking-type tamper-resistant caps or shall be otherwise secured to prevent unauthorized access. F. All piping shall be run true to grade and shall be arranged to make the best possible appearance. Except where otherwise required by conditions of installation, all piping shall be symmetrical and parallel with lines of buildings or structure in which it is installed. All piping shall be run concealed except in mechanical room and where indicated otherwise. G. All piping and equipment shall be supported and guided. Anchors shall be provided to absorb or transmit thrust and eliminate vibration or pulsation. Hangers or supports shall be provided near each change of direction. Supports shall be so located or shall be of such type as not to unduly restrict the movement of the pipe due to lateral or longitudinal expansion. 3.02 PIPING APPLICATIONS A. Suction (low pressure gas), Hot Gas (high pressure gas) and Liquid Lines 7/8" OD and Smaller for Conventional Air-Conditioning, Heat Pump, and Heat Recovery Applications: Copper, Type ACR, O60 (soft annealed)-temper tubing and field bent fittings with brazed joints. B. Suction (low pressure gas), Hot Gas (high pressure gas), and Liquid Lines 2-1/8" OD and smaller for Conventional Air-Conditioning, Heat Pump, and Heat Recovery Applications: Straight Lengths, Copper, Type ACR Type L, H55 (light drawn)-temper tubing and field bent fittings with brazed joints. 3.03 VALVE AND SPECIALTY APPLICATIONS A. Install service valves as specified or as required to isolate system components. 3.04 PIPING INSTALLATION A. Drawing plans, schematics, and diagrams indicate general location and arrangement of piping systems; route and size piping based on manufacturer’s recommended line lengths and other design considerations. Install piping as indicated unless deviations to layout are approved on Shop Drawings. B. Install refrigerant piping according to ASHRAE 15 (latest version). C. Install piping in concealed locations unless otherwise indicated and except in equipment rooms and service areas. Concealed locations shall be free of pipe joints. D. Install piping indicated to be exposed and piping in equipment rooms and service areas at right angles or parallel to building walls. Diagonal runs are prohibited unless specifically indicated otherwise. E. Install piping above accessible ceilings to allow sufficient space for ceiling panel removal. F. Install piping adjacent to machines to allow service and maintenance. Jordan & Skala Engineers INSULATION AND ACCESSORIES REFRIGERANT PIPING, 23 2300 -5 G. Install piping free of sags and bends. H. Field bend changes in direction. I. Select system components with pressure rating equal to or greater than maximum allowable working pressure. J. Install piping as short and direct as possible, with a minimum number of joints, elbows, and fittings. K. Arrange piping to allow inspection and service of refrigeration equipment. Install valves and specialties in accessible locations to allow for service and inspection. Install access doors or panels as specified in Division 08 Section “Access Doors and Frames” if valves or equipment requiring maintenance is concealed behind finished surfaces. L. Provide jacketed insulation in locations where exposed to mechanical injury. M. When brazing, remove solenoid-valve coils and sight glasses; also, remove valve stems, seats, and packing, and accessible internal parts of refrigerant specialties. Do not apply heat near expansion-valve bulb. N. Install piping with adequate clearance between pipe and adjacent walls and hangers or between pipes for insulation installation. O. Install sleeves for piping penetrations of walls, ceilings, and floors. Comply with requirements for sleeves specified in Section 23 00 00 HVAC General. P. Install sleeve seals for piping penetrations of concrete walls and slabs. Comply with requirements for sleeve seals specified in Section 23 00 00 HVAC General. Q. Install escutcheons for piping penetrations of walls, ceilings, and floors. Comply with requirements for escutcheons specified in Division 23 00 00 HVAC General. R. Provide proper compensation for pipe/tube expansion and contraction per equipment manufacturers recommendations. 3.05 PIPE JOINT CONSTRUCTION A. Brazed Joints: Construct joints according to AWS’s “Brazing Handbook,” Chapter “Pipe and Tube”. 1. Use Type BcuP-5 (15% Ag, 80% Cu, 5% P), copper-phosphorus alloy pre-formed brazing rings for joining copper swage fittings and copper socket fittings with copper pipe.  Do NOT use flux. 2. Use Type Bag-5 (45% Ag), cadmium-free silver alloy for joining copper with bronze or steel.  Use manufacturers recommended flux. B. Field Swaged Brazing Cups: Fabricate brazing cup on one tubing end for each coupling. Only O60 (soft annealed) and H55 (light drawn) may be swaged. Do NOT swage H58 (drawn general purpose). Use swaging tool designed to provide a minimum of 0.0015" brazing gap and a maximum of 0.005" brazing gap. Brazing cup depth for each tube size shall be as follows: 1/4"  3/8"  1/2"  5/8"  3/4"  7/8"  1-1/8"  1-3/8"  1-5/8"  2-1/8"  0.250"  0.280"  0.310"  0.390"  0.420"  0.460"  0.510"  0.560"  0.600"  0.700"  C. Field Bends: Fabricate field bends with a center-line bend radius greater than or equal to 4 times the nominal OD of the pipe or tube. Tube shall be bent with a tubing bender sized for ACR OD tube sizes and shall not cause cracks or wrinkles in the tube or pipe. Do NOT use a conduit bender for bending ACR copper. The difference between maximum and minimum diameters for pipe bends should not exceed 8% of the nominal outside diameter of the pipe. Only O60 soft annealed-temper and H55 light drawn-temper shall be field bent. Do NOT field bend H58 drawn general purpose-temper copper tube. D. Brazing and joining procedure: 1. Tube ends shall be cut with a clean sharp tubing cutter. 2. Deburr the I.D. of the cut tube end with a clean deburring tool. 3. Visually inspect the interior of each tube for obstructions and debris before assembly. Protect the joint from contamination before brazing. Jordan & Skala Engineers INSULATION AND ACCESSORIES REFRIGERANT PIPING, 23 2300 -6 4. Method of pre-cleaning: Non-shedding abrasive pads (Scotch Bright) to remove all oxides in the brazing area followed by wiping with a clean lint-free white cloth. Do not groove the surfaces while cleaning. 5. Purge all tubing with oil free nitrogen while brazing and until cool to the touch. Use an oxygen analyzer to verify the absence of oxygen prior to brazing. The oxygen content shall be less than 1% before start of brazing. 6. Use a neutral to slightly reducing flame using oxy/acetylene or oxy/propane. 7. Use the proper torch tip based on tube size as recommended by the torch manufacturer.  Use of Turbo-Torch or Rosebud is permitted. 8. Post Brazing Cleaning: Exterior of all completed joints shall be washed with a water-soaked rag or sponge, followed by brushing with a stainless-steel hand wire brush to remove any residue for inspection. 3.06 HANGERS AND SUPPORTS A. Piping hangers and supports must accommodate expansion and contraction, vibration, dead load of piping and its contents, and seismic-bracing requirements. B. Install the following pipe attachments or combination thereof: 1. Adjustable steel clevis hangers for individual horizontal runs. 2. Channel strut or angle iron trapeze for multiple horizontal runs 3. Galvanized steel saddle with attachment screw for channel strut applications 4. Rigid high compressive strength foam insulating pipe support at all clamps and support points. 5. Rigid high compressive strength foam pipe support at all riser clamps. 6. Do NOT attach hangers directly to pipe or tube. C. Install hangers for copper tubing with the following maximum spacing and minimum rod sizes: 1. Up to 3/4" OD: Maximum span, 60 inches; minimum rod size, 3/8 inch. 2. Greater than 3/4" thru 1" OD: Maximum span, 72 inches; minimum rod size, 3/8 inch. 3. Greater than 1" thru 2-1/8" OD: Maximum span, 96 inches; minimum rod size, 3/8 inch. D. Support multi-floor vertical runs every 10 feet and at least at each floor with riser clamps. 3.07 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Perform tests and inspections and prepare test reports. B. Tests and Inspections: 1. Comply with ASME B31.5, Chapter VI. 2. Test as follows or as recommended by the equipment manufacturer’s installation instructions: a. Line Test Pressure for Refrigerant R-410A: 1) Suction (low pressure gas) Lines:  550 psig, or per equipment manufacturers recommendation. 2) Hot-Gas (high pressure gas) and Liquid Lines:  550 psig, or per equipment manufacturers recommendation. 3. Test refrigerant piping and specialties. Isolate compressor, condenser, evaporator, and safety devices from test pressure if they are not rated above the test pressure. a. Fill system with 95/5 nitrogen/hydrogen to the required test pressure. b. System shall maintain test pressure at the manifold gage throughout duration of test. c. Test all joints and fittings with hydrogen leak detector, at test pressure. d. Remake leaking joints using new materials, and retest until satisfactory results are achieved. Jordan & Skala Engineers INSULATION AND ACCESSORIES REFRIGERANT PIPING, 23 2300 -7 3.08 SYSTEM CHARGING A. Charge system using the following procedures and per equipment manufacturer’s installation instructions. 1. Evacuate (triple evacuation procedure) entire refrigerant system with a vacuum pump to obtain a steady state vacuum of less than 500 micrometers. If vacuum holds for 12 hours, system is ready for charging. Do NOT evacuate the system through a charging manifold. Use only suction rated hoses and core removal tools. 2. Break vacuum with refrigerant gas, allowing pressure to build up to 2 psig. 3. Charge system as recommended by equipment manufacturer. 3.09 OWNER REVIEW OF MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS A. Review manufacturer’s maintenance instructions with the owner’s representative to make them aware of any reoccurring maintenance requirements such as recoating piping insulation, lubricating service valves, etc. END OF SECTION 23 2300 Appendix A Jordan & Skala Engineers INSULATION AND ACCESSORIES REFRIGERANT PIPING, 23 2300 -8 SECTION 23 3100 -DUCTWORK AND ACCESSORIES PART 1 -GENERAL 1.01 DESCRIPTION A. All work in this section shall be subject to the provisions of Section 23 00 00 -HVAC General. B. Furnish and install all material, labor, accessories, etc. shown on the drawings and as specified herein to completely install all ductwork systems. C. Ductwork systems shall be classified as follows: 1. Static pressure class +2 in. wg -from constant volume air handling unit, and terminal unit to supply diffusers; all return, outside air and exhaust ductwork; stair pressurization ductwork. D. Refer to PART 3 – EXECUTION for duct sealing requirements. E. Ductwork shall be constructed according to the latest edition of SMACNA ductwork construction standards applicable to the type of ductwork, system pressures described above, and the system material construction. F. Duct sizes shown on the drawings are nominal inside clear. G. For fire resistive ductwork, refer to Section 23 31 00 Fire Resistive Ductwork and Accessories. 1.02 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Fire, smoke, combination fire/smoke and radiation dampers shall be installed and maintained in accordance with: 1. Manufacturer’s installation instructions 2. UL installation instructions 3. NFPA Standard 90A (latest edition) 4. SMACNA’s Fire, Smoke and Radiation Damper Installation Guide for HVAC Systems (latest edition) B. Ductwork in food service establishments shall be in accordance with SMACNA’s Food Grade Ductwork and Sheet Metal Guidelines. 1.03 SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: 1. Duct materials: a. Fiberglass ductboard b. Outdoor duct systems c. Flexible duct connectors d. Flexible ductwork 2. Dampers and accessories 3. Remote damper operators 4. Access doors 5. Flexible duct connectors 6. Duct liner 7. Emergency generator exhaust system 8. Sealants, mastics, adhesives and coatings B. For all fire dampers, combination fire and smoke dampers, and smoke dampers, submit UL approved installation instructions for each specific application. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.01 DUCTWORK A. Ductwork shall be constructed of galvanized steel sheets (G90 minimum) of the thickness listed in the SMACNA manuals for the pressures referenced above in public spaces. Inside the dwellings, 1." thick if required by the applicable energy code) resin-bonded fiberglass duct board with fire-resistive foil-scrim-kraft (FSK) vapor retarder on the outside surface and a smooth mat finish on the air-side surface is acceptable. Fabrication and installation shall conform to SMACNA’s Fibrous Glass Duct Construction Standards; latest edition. See below for additional requirements]. B. Single-Wall Rectangular Ducts and Fittings: 1. General Fabrication Requirements: Comply with SMACNA's “HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible” based on indicated static-pressure class unless otherwise indicated. 2. Transverse Joints: Select joint types and fabricate per SMACNA's “HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible,”“Transverse (Girth) Joints,” for static pressure class, applicable sealing requirements, materials involved, duct-support intervals, and other provisions in SMACNA's “HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible.” a. Alternate Product: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide Ductmate Industries, Inc.; 25/35/45 Rectangular Flange System or comparable product by one of the following: 1) Nexus PDQ; a division of Shilco Holdings, Inc. 2) Ward Industries, Inc; a division of Hart & Cooley, Inc. 3) Prior Approved Equal b. Slide-on Flanges: 1) Description: Roll-formed, add on, factory-fabricated, slide-on transverse flange connectors, gaskets, and components. 2) Material: galvanized steel 3) Gauge and Shape: For duct constructed using prefabricated systems, refer to the manufacturer's guidelines for sheet gauge, intermediate reinforcement size and spacing, and proper joint reinforcement. 4) Manufacturers of prefabricated systems must provide duct construction and reinforcement guidelines along with independent testing for leakage, deflection, and seismic performance. 5) Independent leakage testing must be provided for systems operating at pressures of 10 in. wg (or greater) positive or negative. 6) Manufacturer's prefabricated systems printed assembly and installation procedures must be adhered to at all times. 7) Manufacturer's procedures must include fastener and cleat spacing along with details for all system variations including break-away and roofing connections. 8) All manufactured system components must be clearly embossed with manufacturer's name or markings. Substitution of manufacturer's system components is not permitted. c. Formed flanges will be accepted on ductwork 42 inches wide or less and subjected to 2 in. wg static positive pressure or less. 1) Formed on Flanges: Construct as T-25 A/B flanges, of which construction guidelines are given in Figure 2-1 of the 2005 SMACNA “HVAC Duct Constructions Standards, Metal and Flexible.” No other construction standards pertaining to formed on flanges will be accepted. 2) Formed on flanges must include the use of corners, securely crimped in place, bolts, cleat, and gasket 3. Longitudinal Seams: Select seam types and fabricate per SMACNA's “HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible,”“Longitudinal Seams – Rectangular Ducts,” for static-pressure class, applicable sealing requirements, materials involved, duct support intervals, and other provisions in SMACNA's “HVAC Duct Construction Standards – Metal and Flexible.” 4. Snap-lock longitudinal duct seams are not allowed in public spaces unless secured with sheet metal fastening screws as recommended by SMACNA. 5. Elbows, Transitions, Offsets, Branch Connections, and Other Duct Construction: Select types and fabricate per SMACNA's “HVAC Duct Construction Standards .Metal and Flexible,” Chapter 4, “Fittings and Other Construction,” for static-pressure class, applicable sealing requirements, materials involved, duct-support intervals, and other provisions in SMACNA's “HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible.” C. Single-Wall Round and Flat-Oval Ducts and Fittings 1. General Fabrication Requirements: Comply with SMACNA's “HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible,” Chapter 3, “Round, Oval, and Flexible Duct,” based on indicated static-pressure class unless otherwise indicated. a. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1) Linx Industries 2) McGill AirFlow, LLC 3) SEMCO, LLC 4) Sheet Metal Connectors, Inc. 5) Spiral Manufacturing Co., Inc. 6) Prior Approved Equal 2. Flat-Oval Ducts: Indicated dimensions are the duct width (major dimension) and diameter of the round sides connecting the flat portions of the duct (minor dimension). 3. Transverse Joints: Select joint types and fabricate per SMACNA's “HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible,” Figure 3-1, “Round Duct Transverse Joints,” for static-pressure class, applicable sealing requirements, materials involved, duct-support intervals, and other provisions in SMACNA's “HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible.” a. Transverse Joints in Ducts Larger Than 50 Inches in Diameter:  Flanged. 1) Unexposed Duct 3 inches to 30 inches in diameter: Round duct connects with a one-piece interior slip coupling at least two gages heavier than duct wall, beaded at center and fastened to duct with screws. Seal joint with an approved sealant applied continuously around both ends of coupler prior to assembling and after fastening. 2) All Exposed Duct and Unexposed Duct 30 inches to 72 inches in diameter: Three-piece, gasket flanged-joint consisting of two internal flanges, with integral mastic sealant, and one external closure ring, for connecting the internal flanges and securing the closed cell neoprene gasketing in place. a) Basis-of-Design Product: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide Ductmate Industries, Inc.; Spiralmate or similar comparable product by one of the following: (1) Prior Approved Equal 3) Ducts larger than 72 inches in diameter: Use companion angle flanged joints as defined in Figure 3-1 for the 2005 SMACNA Manual “HVAC Duct Construction Standards, Metal and Flexible” Third Edition. Refer to manual for proper sizing and construction details. 4) Dust Collection Systems and Exposed Duct 3 inches to 14 inches in diameter: Use a one-piece, polyethylene lined gasket connector with integrated bolt for the closure system. a) Basis-of-Design Product: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide Ductmate Industries, Inc.; Quicksleeve or comparable product by one of the following: (1) Prior Approved Equal 4. Longitudinal Seams: Select seam types and fabricate per SMACNA's “HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible,” Figure 3-2, “Round Duct Longitudinal Seams,” for static-pressure class, applicable sealing requirements, materials involved, duct-support intervals, and other provisions in SMACNA's “HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible.” a. Fabricate round ducts larger than 90 inches in diameter with butt-welded longitudinal seams. b. Fabricate flat-oval ducts larger than 72 inches in width (major dimension) with butt-welded longitudinal seams. 5. Tees and Laterals: Select types and fabricate per SMACNA's “HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible,” Figure 3-5, “90 Degree Tees and Laterals,” and Figure 3-6, “Conical Tees,” for static-pressure class, applicable sealing requirements, materials involved, duct-support intervals, and other provisions in SMACNA's “HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible.” D. Double-Wall Round and Flat-Oval Ducts and Fittings 1. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: a. Linx Industries b. McGill AirFlow, LLC c. SEMCO, LLC d. Sheet Metal Connectors, Inc. 2. Flat-Oval Ducts: Indicated dimensions are the duct width (major dimension) and diameter of the round sides connecting the flat portions of the duct (minor dimension) of the inner duct. 3. Outer Duct: Comply with SMACNA's “HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible,” Chapter 3, “Round, Oval, and Flexible Duct,” based on static-pressure class unless otherwise indicated. a. Transverse Joints: Select joint types and fabricate per SMACNA's “HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible,” Figure 3-1, “Round Duct Transverse Joints,” for static-pressure class, applicable sealing requirements, materials involved, duct-support intervals, and other provisions in SMACNA's “HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible.” 1) Transverse Joints in Ducts Larger Than 50 inches in Diameter: Flanged. a) All Exposed Duct and Unexposed Duct 30 inches to 72 inches in diameter: Three-piece, gasket flanged-joint consisting of two internal flanges, with integral mastic sealant, and one external closure ring for connecting the internal flanges and securing the closed cell neoprene gasketing in place. b) Basis-of-Design Product: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide Ductmate Industries, Inc.; Spiralmate or comparable product by one of the following: (1) Prior Approved Equal b. Longitudinal Seams: Select seam types and fabricate per SMACNA's “HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible,” Figure 3-2, “Round Duct Longitudinal Seams,” for static-pressure class, applicable sealing requirements, materials involved, duct-support intervals, and other provisions in SMACNA's “HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible.” 1) Fabricate round ducts larger than 90 inches in diameter with butt-welded longitudinal seams. 2) Fabricate flat-oval ducts larger than 72 inches in width (major dimension) with butt-welded longitudinal seams. c. Tees and Laterals: Select types and fabricate per SMACNA's “HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible,” Figure 3-5, “90 Degree Tees and Laterals,” and Figure 3-6, “Conical Tees,” for static-pressure class, applicable sealing requirements, materials involved, duct-support intervals, and other provisions in SMACNA's “HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible.” 4. Inner Duct: Minimum 0.028-inch (24 gauge) perforated galvanized sheet steel having 3/32-inch diameter perforations, with an overall open area of 23 percent. 5. Interstitial Insulation: Fibrous-glass liner complying with ASTM C 1071, NFPA 90A, or NFPA 90B; and with NAIMA AH124, “Fibrous Glass Duct Liner Standard”. a. Maximum Thermal Conductivity: 0.27 Btu x in./h x sq. ft. x ºF at 75ºF mean temperature. b. Install spacers that position the inner duct at uniform distance from outer duct without compressing insulation. c. Coat insulation with antimicrobial coating. d. Cover insulation with polyester film complying with UL 181, Class 1. 6. Interstitial Insulation:  Flexible elastomeric duct liner complying with ASTM C 534, Type II for sheet materials, and with NFPA 90A or NFPA 90B. a. Maximum Thermal Conductivity: 0.25 Btu x in./h x sq. ft. x ºF at 75ºF mean temperature. E. Rectangular sheet metal duct elbows shall be smooth radius type without turning vanes or square (or mitered) type with turning vanes. Sharp throat elbows (ASHRAE Fitting No. CR3-2) shall not be permitted. Round sheet metal duct elbows shall be smooth radius type without turning vanes, gored type or mitered type with turning vanes. F. Unless otherwise indicated, elbows shall have a centerline radius of not less than 1. times the width of the duct. Where space limitations necessitate use of short radius or square elbows, provide turning vanes. G. Fiberglass duct board shall be UL 181 listed as a Class 1 Rigid Air Duct with a thermal conductivity not to exceed 0.23 at 75°F per ASTM C 518. Thickness shall be as indicated on the drawings or as required by the energy code in effect. Fiberglass duct board shall be Johns Manville Super Duct RC, Knauf Atmosphere Air Duct Board, Owens Corning QuietR Duct Board or Certainteed Ultra*Duct Black Duct Board. 1. Tapes and mastics used to seal fibrous glass ductwork shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 181A and shall be marked “181A-P” for pressure-sensitive tape, “181A-M” for mastic or “181A-H” for heat-sensitive tape. H. Exhaust ductwork shall be galvanized sheet metal (G 90 minimum) constructed to SMACNA standards and shall not be insulated unless noted otherwise. I. Sheet metal materials shall be free of pitting, seam marks, roller marks, stains, discolorations, and other imperfections. J. Exterior supply and return air ductwork shall be constructed of galvanized sheet metal (G 90 minimum) lined with 2" thick 3 lb/ft3 duct liner board (R-8 min.) Johns-Manville Linacoustic R-300. All seams shall be externally sealed watertight with a 30-year silicone caulk and coated with a rust preventive coating over the entire duct surface. Rust preventative coating shall be “Rust Destroyer” by Advanced Protective Products, Inc., or approved equal. As an alternative to insulated sheet metal, an outdoor duct system as manufactured by Thermaduct, LLC may be used. The system shall incorporate duct and fittings having an installed minimum R-value of 8 [R-12 min. in Climate Zones 5 through 8]. The system shall utilize non-fibrous closed cell Kingspan KoolDuct fortified inner liner compliant to UL (C-UL) 181, Standard for Safety Listed, Class 1 system and SMACNA Class 1 leakage, or less. Submit product data and layout drawings during the submittal phase. Crown or slope ductwork at ." per foot transversely to prevent standing water on top of ductwork. For projects located within 2 miles of the seacoast, flanges and hardware shall be aluminum (alloy 3003 -H14 temper per ASTM B209). K. Supply and exhaust ductwork serving swimming pool equipment and chemical storage rooms shall be 16-gauge aluminum (alloy 3003 -H14 temper per ASTM B209). L. Support roof mounted ductwork at 6 feet (max.) on center with Mifab Series DSA duct support system. UV resistant rubber bases shall be placed on roofing walk pad material. Coordinate with general contractor and roofing installer. Manufacturer shall submit layout drawings and product information during the submittal phase. 2.02 FLEXIBLE DUCTWORK A. Flexible ducts shall be listed and labeled as UL Standard 181 Class 1 air duct. Air connectors are not allowed. B. Flexible ductwork shall comply with the following: 1. NFPA 90A, “Installation of Air Conditioning and Ventilating Systems” 2. NFPA 90B, “Installation of Warm Air Heating and Air Conditioning Systems” 3. SMACNA's “HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible” for acceptable materials, material thicknesses, and duct construction methods unless otherwise indicated. 4. Air Diffusion Council's “ADC Flexible Air Duct Test Code FD 72-R1”. 5. ASTM E 96/E 96M, "Test Methods for Water Vapor Transmission of Materials." C. Flexible ductwork shall be installed between main supply ducts and diffusers. Length shall be a maximum of 8'-0” long, except in residential applications, where the length shall be as indicated. D. Flexible ductwork shall be Thermaflex M-KE R-6 (R value = 6.0 minimum or as required by local energy code) flexible air duct or approved equal. E. Flexible ductwork size shall be the same size as the diffuser neck it serves, unless indicated otherwise. F. For public spaces, take-offs for sheet metal ductwork shall be made using a conical spin-in type fitting with manual balancing damper. G. For residential spaces ( inside the dwelling), Take-offs for fiberglass ductboard shall be made using a starting collar fitting with crimp and bead (tab type). H. Flexible duct connections to ceiling diffusers shall be installed without kinks or sags to provide unrestricted airflow.  Provide Flex Flow Elbow supports by Thermaflex. I. Tapes and mastics used to seal metallic and flexible air ducts shall comply with UL 181B and shall be marked “181B-FX” for pressure-sensitive tape or “181B-M” for mastic. J. Mechanical fasteners for use with flexible nonmetallic air ducts shall comply with ul 181b and shall be marked “181B-C”. 2.03 FIRE DAMPERS A. Fire dampers shall be installed at all locations where ductwork or supply or return air openings penetrate any floor, wall or partition with a fire rating. B. All fire dampers shall be of the “Dynamic” type as classified in UL Standard 555. C. Fire dampers shall have a rating compatible with the floor, wall or partition, shall be tested to UL Standard 555 and be labeled for the intended installation (horizontal or vertical). D. Maximum pressure drop: 0.10 in. wg; provide ductwork transitions as required so as not to exceed maximum pressure drop. E. Fire Resistance Rating: 1. hours unless noted otherwise indicated on drawings for 3 hours. F. Closure device: Each fire damper shall be equipped with a factory installed heat responsive device (fusible link) rated to close the damper when temperature at the damper reaches: 165°F G. Airflow Closure Rating: 1. Dynamic fire dampers shall be selected for the velocity and pressure rating of the intended installation. Refer to the plans and schedules for airflow rates (CFM) and pressures (in. wg). 2. Dampers shall have a minimum velocity rating of 2000 fpm at a pressure rating of 4 in. wg. 3. Dampers in systems operating above 2000 fpm or 4 in. wg shall be selected for a velocity rating of 4000 fpm at a pressure rating of 6 in. wg or a velocity rating of 6000 fpm at a pressure rating of 8 in. wg as required. H. Types: 1. Curtain: for use in systems up to 4000 fpm velocity; Style B or C with the blade stack out of the airstream (Style A with the blade stack in the airstream may be used behind registers and grilles or where space conditions do not permit the use of a Style B damper). a. Construction: 1) Frame: Galvanized steel (in gauges required by manufacturer’s UL listing). 2) Blade design: interlocking galvanized steel 3) Sleeves: Damper shall be supplied as a single assembly with a factory sleeve. 4) Retaining Angles: Damper shall be supplied with factory retaining angles sized to provide installation overlap in accordance with the manufacturer’s UL listing. 5) Duct Transition Connection: breakaway type 2. Round: for use in systems up to 2000 fpm velocity. a. Construction: 1) Frame: Galvanized steel (in gauges required by manufacturer’s UL listing). 2) Blade design: single galvanized steel blade (in gauge required by manufacturer’s UL listing). 3) Retainer plate(s): supplied with damper. 4) Sleeves: Length as required per wall thickness. 5) Duct Transition Connection: breakaway type. 3. Multi-blade: a. Up to 2000 fpm velocity: Triple vee-groove type blade. b. 2000-4000 fpm velocity: Fabricated double skin airfoil type blade. c. Construction: 1) Frame: Galvanized steel with mitered and interlocking corners (in gauges required by manufacturer’s UL listing). 2) Blade design: 16 ga. galvanized steel strengthened by three longitudinal 1" deep Vee grooves running the entire length of each blade. Each blade shall be symmetrical relative to its axle pivot point, presenting identical performance characteristics with air flowing in either direction through the damper. Provide symmetrical blades of varying size as required to completely fill the damper opening. 3) Sleeves: Damper shall be supplied as a single assembly with a factory sleeve. 4) Retaining Angles: Damper shall be supplied with factory retaining angles sized to provide installation overlap in accordance with the manufacturer’s UL listing. 5) Duct Transition Connection: breakaway type I. All dampers shall be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturer’s UL approved installation details. J. Where fire dampers are required in a fibrous glass ductboard system, provide sheet metal sleeve per manufacturer’s UL installation instructions. Verify gage of sleeve and attachment angle with governing code authorities. Installation shall also conform to SMACNA Figure 5-9 “Fibrous Glass Duct Installation”. 2.04 CEILING RADIATION DAMPERS A. A listed ceiling radiation damper shall be installed at all locations where ductwork or register, diffuser, grille, etc. penetrates the ceiling membrane of a fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly. Ceiling radiation dampers shall have a rating compatible with the floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly and shall be tested to UL Standard 555C. B. Fire Resistance Rating:  1 hour (minimum). C. Closure device: Each ceiling radiation damper shall be equipped with a factory installed heat responsive device (fusible link) rated to close the damper when temperature at the damper reaches: 165°F D. Construction: 1. Dampers shall be factory-built curtain or butterfly type. They shall conform to the requirements of NFPA Standard 90A and be UL Labeled for the required assembly rating. 2. All dampers shall be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturer’s UL approved installation instructions. 3. Provide steel sleeves, mounting angles and steel duct drops of design and length where required to permit mounting within the opening. 4. Provide thermal blanket where required by the manufacturer’s UL installation instructions. 5. Where ceiling radiation dampers are shown on the drawings, and if fiberglass ductwork is used, dampers shall be installed with a sheet metal collar or housing or shall be listed for use with fiberglass ductwork. 6. Where fiberglass ductboard plenums are used they shall conform to manufacturer’s Fiberglass Ductboard Plenum Installation Instructions. 2.05 COMBINATION FIRE AND SMOKE DAMPERS A. Fire/smoke dampers shall be installed at all locations where ductwork or supply or return air openings penetrate any floor, wall or partition with a fire and smoke rating, or where otherwise shown on the drawings. B. Fire/smoke dampers shall be provided with actuators capable of closing the damper on activation of area smoke detectors, the fire alarm system and/or the Firefighter’s Smoke Control Panel and shall be normally closed. Actuators shall be compatible with the activating smoke detectors or fire alarm system (coordinate with other trades). C. Unless otherwise indicated, smoke detectors integral to the combination fire/smoke damper shall be furnished and installed by the fire alarm contractor (coordinate with other trades). D. All combination fire/smoke dampers shall be of the “Dynamic” type as classified in UL Standards 555 and 555S. E. Fire/smoke dampers shall have a rating compatible with the floor, wall or partition, shall be tested to UL Standards 555 and 555S and be labeled for the intended installation (horizontal or vertical). F. Maximum pressure drop: 0.10 in. wg; provide ductwork transitions as required so as not to exceed maximum pressure drop. G. Fire Resistance Rating:  1. hours unless noted otherwise on drawings for 3 hours. H. Leakage Rating: Class 1 (maximum of 8 cfm/ft2 at 4 in. wg) unless noted otherwise. I. Elevated Temperature Rating: 350°F (177°C) for 30 minutes. J. Airflow Closure Rating: 1. Dynamic fire/smoke dampers shall be selected for the velocity and pressure rating of the intended installation. Refer to the plans and schedules for airflow rates (CFM) and pressures (in. wg). 2. Dampers shall have a minimum velocity rating of 2000 fpm at a pressure rating of 4 in. wg. 3. Dampers in systems operating above 2000 fpm or 4 in. wg shall be selected for a velocity rating of 4000 fpm at a pressure rating of 6 in. wg or a velocity rating of 6000 fpm at a pressure rating of 8 in. wg as required. K. Types: 1. Round: for use in systems up to 3000 fpm velocity. a. Construction: 1) Frame: Galvanized steel (in gauges required by manufacturer’s UL listing). 2) Blade design: single galvanized steel blade (in gauge required by manufacturer’s UL listing). 3) Retainer plate(s): supplied with damper. 4) Sleeves: Length as required per wall thickness. 5) Duct Transition Connection: breakaway type. 2. Multi-blade: a. Up to 2000 fpm velocity: Triple Vee-groove type blade. b. 2000-4000 fpm velocity: Fabricated double skin airfoil type blade. c. Construction: 1) Frame: Galvanized steel with mitered and interlocking corners (in gauges required by manufacturer’s UL listing). 2) Blade design: 16 ga. galvanized steel strengthened by three longitudinal 1" deep Vee grooves running the entire length of each blade. Each blade shall be symmetrical relative to its axle pivot point, presenting identical performance characteristics with air flowing in either direction through the damper. Provide symmetrical blades of varying size as required to completely fill the damper opening. 3) Blade Stops: Each blade stop (at top and bottom of damper frame) shall occupy no more than ." of the damper opening area to allow for maximum free area and to minimize pressure loss across the damper. 4) Seals: a) Blade Edge: Blade seals shall be extruded silicone rubber permanently bonded to the appropriate blade edges. b) Jamb: Flexible stainless-steel compression type. 5) Linkage: Concealed in jamb. 6) Axles: Minimum ." diameter plated steel. 7) Bearings: Axle bearings shall be sintered bronze sleeve type rotating in polished extruded holes in the damper frame. 8) Sleeves: Damper shall be supplied as a single assembly with a factory sleeve. 9) Retaining Angles: Damper shall be supplied with factory retaining angles sized to provide installation overlap in accordance with the manufacturer’s UL listing. 10) Duct Transition Connection: breakaway type L. Heat Responsive Device: Electric, controlled closure, quick detect heat-actuated device designed to prevent damage to ductwork and other HVAC system components. The device shall be a reusable/resettable link (RRL) with a temperature setting of 165°F (74°C). M. Damper Motors: Two-position meeting the following: 1. Comply with NEMA designation, temperature rating, service factor, enclosure type, efficiency requirements and the following: a. Motor Sizes: Minimum size as indicated. If not indicated, large enough so the driven load will not require motor to operate in service factor range above 1.0. b. Controllers, Electrical Devices, and Wiring: Comply with requirements for electrical devices and connections specified in Division 26 Sections. c. Permanent-Split-Capacitor or Shaded-Pole Motors: With oil-immersed and sealed gear trains. d. Spring-Return Motors: Equip with an integral spiral-spring mechanism where indicated. Enclose entire spring mechanism in a removable housing designed for service or adjustments. Size for running torque rating of 150 in. x lbf (17 N x m) and breakaway torque rating of 150 in. x lbf (17 N x m). e. Outdoor Motors and Motors in Outdoor-Air Intakes: Equip with O-ring gaskets designed to make motors weatherproof. Equip motors with internal heaters to permit normal operation at minus 40°F (minus 40°C). f. Nonspring-Return Motors: For dampers larger than 25 sq. ft. (2.3 sq. m), size motor for running torque rating of 150 in. x lbf (17 N x m) and breakaway torque rating of 300 in. x lbf (34 N x m). g. Electrical Connection:  115 V, single phase, 60 Hz. N. Momentary Test Switch (for use in combination fire and smoke dampers that are not part of a smoke management system): factory mounted and wired assembly for testing and cycling the damper during start-up and maintenance. Power wiring to test switch and actuator shall be per manufacturer’s installation instructions. O. Accessories for active smoke management systems: 1. Open Closed Indicator (OCI): factory mounted and tested with two switches, one set to close when the damper blades are at their open position, and the other set to close when the damper blades are at their closed position. This will be wired to the Fire Fighter’s Smoke Control Station to indicate true damper position. 2. Temperature Limited Override (TLO): factory mounted and tested with two temperature sensing devices (thermostats) with fixed settings (165°F [74°C] and 350°F [177°C]). The primary sensor (with the 165°F [74°C] setting) may be bypassed by an external electrical signal allowing the damper to reopen and remain open until the temperature reaches the setting of the secondary sensor (350°F [177°C]). When the temperature of the secondary sensor is exceeded, the damper closes and remains closed thereafter. 3. Test Switch and Indicator Panel: 5" x 5" control panel with toggle switch, red LED (replaceable) indicator light to indicate closed damper position and a green LED (replaceable) indicator light to indicate open damper position. 4. Power wiring to OCI, TLO, test switch and actuator shall be per manufacturer’s installation instructions. P. Combination Fire and Smoke Dampers shall have a single point wiring per UL requirements (except where two signals are required as with the Temperature Limited Override specified above). 2.06 CORRIDOR COMBINATION FIRE AND SMOKE DAMPERS A. Corridor fire/smoke dampers shall be installed at all locations where ductwork or supply or return air openings penetrate any tunnel corridor ceiling with a fire and smoke rating, or where otherwise shown on the drawings. B. Corridor fire/smoke dampers shall be provided with actuators capable of closing the damper onactivation ofarea smoke detectors, the fire alarm system and/or theFirefighter’s Smoke Control Panel and shall be normally closed. Actuators shall be compatible with the activating smoke detectors or fire alarm system (coordinate with other trades). C. Unless otherwise indicated, smoke detectors integral to the corridor fire/smoke damper shall be furnished and installed by the fire alarm contractor (coordinate with other trades). D. All corridor fire/smoke dampers shall be of the “Dynamic” type as classified in UL Standards 555 and 555S. E. Corridor fire/smoke dampers shall be tested to UL Standards 555 and 555S and be labeled for the intended installation. F. Maximum pressure drop: 0.10 in. wg; provide ductwork transitions as required so as not to exceed maximum pressure drop. G. Fire Resistance Rating:  1 hour. H. Leakage Rating: Class 1 (maximum of 8 cfm/ft2 at 4 in. wg) unless noted otherwise. I. Elevated Temperature Rating: 350°F (177°C) for 30 minutes. J. Airflow Closure Rating: 1. Dynamic fire/smoke dampers shall be selected for the velocity and pressure rating of the intended installation. Refer to the plans and schedules for airflow rates (CFM) and pressures (in. wg). 2. Dampers shall have a minimum velocity rating of 2000 fpm at a pressure rating of 4 in. wg. K. Types: 1. Round: for use in systems up to 3000 fpm velocity. a. Construction: 1) Frame: Galvanized steel (in gauges required by manufacturer’s UL listing). 2) Blade design: single galvanized steel blade (in gauge required by manufacturer’s UL listing). 3) Retainer plate(s): supplied with damper. 4) Sleeves: Length as required per wall thickness. 5) Duct Transition Connection: breakaway type. 2. Multi-blade: a. Up to 2000 fpm velocity: Triple vee-groove type blade. b. 2000-4000 fpm velocity: Fabricated double skin airfoil type blade. c. Construction: 1) Frame: Galvanized steel with mitered and interlocking corners (in gauges required by manufacturer’s UL listing). 2) Blade design: 16 ga. galvanized steel strengthened by three longitudinal 1" deep Vee grooves running the entire length of each blade. Each blade shall be symmetrical relative to its axle pivot point, presenting identical performance characteristics with air flowing in either direction through the damper. Provide symmetrical blades of varying size as required to completely fill the damper opening. 3) Blade Stops: Each blade stop (at top and bottom of damper frame) shall occupy no more than ." of the damper opening area to allow for maximum free area and to minimize pressure loss across the damper. 4) Seals: a) Blade Edge: Blade seals shall be extruded silicone rubber permanently bonded to the appropriate blade edges. b) Jamb: Flexible stainless-steel compression type. 5) Linkage: Concealed in jamb. 6) Axles: Minimum ." diameter plated steel. 7) Bearings: Axle bearings shall be sintered bronze sleeve type rotating in polished extruded holes in the damper frame. 8) Sleeves: Damper shall be supplied as a single assembly with a factory sleeve. 9) Retaining Angles: Damper shall be supplied with factory retaining angles sized to provide installation overlap in accordance with the manufacturer’s UL listing. 10) Duct Transition Connection: breakaway type L. Heat Responsive Device: Electric, controlled closure, quick detect heat-actuated device designed to prevent damage to ductwork and other HVAC system components. The device shall be a reusable/resettable link (RRL) with a temperature setting of 165°F (74°C). M. Damper Motors: Two-position meeting the following: 1. Comply with NEMA designation, temperature rating, service factor, enclosure type, efficiency requirements and the following: a. Motor Sizes: Minimum size as indicated. If not indicated, large enough so the driven load will not require motor to operate in service factor range above 1.0. b. Controllers, Electrical Devices, and Wiring: Comply with requirements for electrical devices and connections specified in Division 26 Sections. c. Permanent-Split-Capacitor or Shaded-Pole Motors: With oil-immersed and sealed gear trains. d. Spring-Return Motors: Equip with an integral spiral-spring mechanism where indicated. Enclose entire spring mechanism in a removable housing designed for service or adjustments. Size for running torque rating of 150 in. x lbf (17 N x m) and breakaway torque rating of 150 in. x lbf (17 N x m). e. Outdoor Motors and Motors in Outdoor-Air Intakes: Equip with O-ring gaskets designed to make motors weatherproof. Equip motors with internal heaters to permit normal operation at minus 40°F (minus 40°C). f. Nonspring-Return Motors: For dampers larger than 25 sq. ft. (2.3 sq. m), size motor for running torque rating of 150 in. x lbf (17 N x m) and breakaway torque rating of 300 in. x lbf (34 N x m). g. Electrical Connection:  115 V, single phase, 60 Hz. 2. Momentary Test Switch (for use in combination fire and smoke dampers that are not part of a smoke management system): factory mounted and wired assembly for testing and cycling the damper during start-up and maintenance. Power wiring to test switch and actuator shall be per manufacturer’s installation instructions. N. Accessories for active smoke management systems: 1. Open Closed Indicator (OCI): factory mounted and tested with two switches, one set to close when the damper blades are at their open position, and the other set to close when the damper blades are at their closed position. This will be wired to the Fire Fighter’s Smoke Control Station to indicate true damper position. 2. Test Switch and Indicator Panel: 5" x 5" control panel with toggle switch, red LED (replaceable) indicator light to indicate closed damper position and a green LED (replaceable) indicator light to indicate open damper position. 3. Power wiring to OCI, TLO, test switch and actuator shall be per manufacturer’s installation instructions. O. Corridor Combination Fire and Smoke Dampers shall have a single point wiring per UL requirements (except where two signals are required as with the Temperature Limited Override specified above). 2.07 SMOKE DAMPERS A. Smoke dampers shall be installed at all locations where ductwork or supply or return air openings penetrate any floor, wall or partition with a smoke rating, or where otherwise shown on the drawings, except where such ductwork or openings are part of an engineered smoke removal system. B. Smoke dampers shall be provided with actuators capable of closing the damper on activation of area smoke detectors, the fire alarm system and/or the Firefighter’s Smoke Control Panel and shall be normally closed. Actuators shall be compatible with the activating smoke detectors or fire alarm system (coordinate with other trades). 1. For stair pressurization fans, provide a Class 1, normally open smoke damper at the fan inlet for use as a control damper; Ruskin Model SD60 or equal. C. Unless otherwise indicated, smoke detectors integral to the smoke damper shall be furnished and installed by the fire alarm contractor (coordinate with other trades). D. All smoke dampers shall be tested and certified in accordance with UL Standard 555S. E. Maximum pressure drop: 0.10 in. wg; provide ductwork transitions as required so as not to exceed maximum pressure drop. F. Leakage Rating: Class 1 (maximum of 8 cfm/ft2 at 4 in. wg) unless noted otherwise. G. Elevated Temperature Rating: 350°F (177°C) for 30 minutes. H. Airflow Closure Rating: 1. Dynamic smoke dampers shall be selected for the velocity and pressure rating of the intended installation. Refer to the plans and schedules for airflow rates (CFM) and pressures (in. wg). 2. Dampers shall have a minimum velocity rating of 2000 fpm at a pressure rating of 4 in. wg. 3. Dampers in systems operating above 2000 fpm or 4 in. wg shall be selected for a velocity rating of 4000 fpm at a pressure rating of 6 in. wg or a velocity rating of 6000 fpm at a pressure rating of 8 in. wg as required. I. Types: 1. Round: for use in systems up to 3000 fpm velocity. a. Construction: 1) Frame: Galvanized steel (in gauges required by manufacturer’s UL listing). 2) Blade design: single double skin galvanized steel blade (in gauge required by manufacturer’s UL listing). 3) Retainer plate(s): supplied with damper. 4) Sleeves: Length as required per wall thickness. 5) Duct Transition Connection: breakaway type. 2. Multi-blade: a. Up to 2000 fpm velocity: Triple Vee-groove type blade. b. 2000-4000 fpm velocity: Fabricated double skin airfoil type blade. c. Construction: 1) Frame: Galvanized steel with mitered and interlocking corners (in gauges required by manufacturer’s UL listing). 2) Blade design: 16 ga. galvanized steel strengthened by three longitudinal 1"deep Vee grooves running the entire length of each blade. Each blade shall be symmetrical relative to its axle pivot point, presenting identical performance characteristics with air flowing in either direction through the damper. Provide symmetrical blades of varying size as required to completely fill the damper opening. 3) Blade Stops: Each blade stop (at top and bottom of damper frame) shall occupy no more than ." of the damper opening area to allow for maximum free area and to minimize pressure loss across the damper. 4) Seals: a) Blade Edge: Blade seals shall be extruded silicone rubber permanently bonded to the appropriate blade edges. b) Jamb: Flexible stainless-steel compression type. 5) Linkage: Concealed in jamb. 6) Axles: Minimum ." diameter plated steel. 7) Bearings: Axle bearings shall be sintered bronze sleeve type rotating in polished extruded holes in the damper frame. 8) Sleeves: Damper shall be supplied as a single assembly with a factory sleeve. 9) Retaining Angles: Damper shall be supplied with factory retaining angles sized to provide installation overlap in accordance with the manufacturer’s UL listing. 10) Duct Transition Connection: breakaway type J. Damper Motors: Two-position meeting the following: 1. Comply with NEMA designation, temperature rating, service factor, enclosure type, efficiency requirements and the following: a. Motor Sizes: Minimum size as indicated. If not indicated, large enough so the driven load will not require motor to operate in service factor range above 1.0. b. Controllers, Electrical Devices, and Wiring: Comply with requirements for electrical devices and connections specified in Division 26 Sections. c. Permanent-Split-Capacitor or Shaded-Pole Motors: With oil-immersed and sealed gear trains. d. Spring-Return Motors: Equip with an integral spiral-spring mechanism where indicated. Enclose entire spring mechanism in a removable housing designed for service or adjustments. Size for running torque rating of 150 in. x lbf (17 N x m) and breakaway torque rating of 150 in. x lbf (17 N x m). e. Outdoor Motors and Motors in Outdoor-Air Intakes: Equip with O-ring gaskets designed to make motors weatherproof. Equip motors with internal heaters to permit normal operation at minus 40°F (minus 40°C). f. Nonspring-Return Motors: For dampers larger than 25 sq. ft. (2.3 sq. m), size motor for running torque rating of 150 in. x lbf (17 N x m) and breakaway torque rating of 300 in. x lbf (34 N x m). g. Electrical Connection:  115 V, single phase, 60 Hz. 2. Momentary Test Switch (for use in smoke dampers that are not part of a smoke management system): factory mounted and wired assembly for testing and cycling the damper during start-up and maintenance. Power wiring to test switch and actuator shall be per manufacturer’s installation instructions. K. Accessories for active smoke management systems: 1. Open Closed Indicator (OCI): factory mounted and tested with two switches, one set to close when the damper blades are at their open position, and the other set to close when the damper blades are at their closed position. This will be wired to the Fire Fighter’s Smoke Control Station to indicate true damper position. 2. Test Switch and Indicator Panel: 5" x 5" control panel with toggle switch, red LED (replaceable) indicator light to indicate closed damper position and a green LED (replaceable) indicator light to indicate open damper position. 3. Power wiring to OCI, test switch and actuator shall be per manufacturer’s installation instructions. L. Smoke Dampers shall have a single point wiring per UL requirements (except where two signals are required as with the Temperature Limited Override specified above). 2.08 CONTROL DAMPERS A. Automatic control dampers shall be installed as shown on the drawings and shall be controlled as described in the 23 09 00 -Automatic Controls section of these specifications. B. Unless indicated otherwise, dampers shall be of the opposed blade type constructed of minimum 18-gauge galvanized steel and shall have rigidly constructed blades less than 6” wide and shall have duct mounting flanges. C. Dampers shall be the low leakage type with replaceable blade and jamb seals.  Maximum pressure drop for dampers operating in systems exceeding 2000 fpm shall be 0.10 in. wg. D. Outside air supply and exhaust openings shall be provided with a Class 1A motorized damper with a maximum leakage rate of 4 cfm/ft2 (20.3 L/s · m2) at 1.0 in. wg (249 Pa) when tested in accordance with AMCA 500D. 1. Gravity (non-motorized) dampers having a maximum leakage rate of 20 cfm/ft2 (101.6 L/s · m2) at 1.0 in. wg (249 Pa) when tested in accordance with AMCA 500D may be used in any one of the following conditions: a. In buildings for exhaust and relief dampers. b. In buildings of less than three stories in height above grade. c. For ventilation air intakes and exhaust and relief dampers in buildings of any height in Climate Zones 1, 2 and 3. d. Where the design outdoor air intake or exhaust capacity does not exceed 300 cfm (141 L/s). Gravity (non-motorized) dampers for ventilation air intakes shall be protected from direct exposure to wind. 2. Dampers smaller than 24 inches (610 mm) in either dimension shall be permitted to have a leakage rate of 40 cfm/ft2 (203.2 L/s · m2) at 1.0 in. wg (249 Pa) when 2.09 REMOTE DAMPER OPERATOR A. Cable operated type: 1. Manufacturers:  Subject to compliance with all requirements: Pottorff, Ventfabrics, Inc., Duro Dyne or Young Regulator Company. 2. Description:  Cable system designed for remote manual damper adjustment. 3. Cable: Stainless steel with flexible steel casing. 4. Control: Concealed regulator kit with steel locking rack and pinion gear with hex head adjustment. Damper control is via push-pull lever action. 5. Linear slot diffuser: Young Regulator Model 270-275ML plenum mounted cable controller with 5020CC (round) or 830AC (rectangular) balancing damper. 6. Wall-Box Mounting: Recessed B. Install in strict conformance with manufacturer’s installation instructions. 2.10 FLEXIBLE DUCT CONNECTORS A. Install flexible duct connectors at connections of sheet metal duct to motor driven equipment, in ductwork crossing building expansion joints, or otherwise noted. Install per manufacturer’s instructions, and support sheet metal ductwork so that no weight is supported by the flexible duct connector. B. Basis-of-Design Product unless noted otherwise below: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide Ductmate Industries, Inc.; PROflex or comparable product by one of the following: 1. Duro Dyne Inc. 2. Ventfabrics, Inc 3. Prior Approved Equal C. Materials:  Flame-retardant or noncombustible fabrics compliant with NFPA 701. D. Coatings and Adhesives: Comply with UL 181, Class 1 and have a maximum flame spread/smoke developed rating of 25/50. E. Metal-Edged Connectors: Factory fabricated with a fabric strip 5.-inches wide attached to two strips of 2.-inch wide, 0.028-inch thick, galvanized sheet steel. Provide metal compatible with connected ducts F. Indoor System, Flexible Connector Fabric:  Glass fabric double coated with neoprene. 1. Minimum Weight:  26 oz./sq. yd. 2. Tensile Strength: 480 lbf/inch in the warp and 360 lbf/inch in the filling. 3. Service Temperature: Minus 40 to plus 200ºF. G. Outdoor System, Flexible Connector Fabric: Glass fabric double coated with weatherproof, synthetic rubber resistant to UV rays and ozone. 1. Minimum Weight:  24 oz./sq. yd. 2. Tensile Strength: 530 lbf/inch in the warp and 440 lbf/inch in the filling. 3. Service Temperature: Minus 50 to plus 250ºF H. Thrust Limits: Combination coil spring and elastomeric insert with spring and insert in compression, and with a load stop. Include rod and angle-iron brackets for attaching to fan discharge and duct. 1. Frame: Steel, fabricated for connection to threaded rods and to allow for a maximum of 30 degrees of angular rod misalignment without binding or reducing isolation efficiency. 2. Outdoor Spring Diameter: Not less than 80 percent of the compressed height of the spring at rated load. 3. Minimum Additional Travel:  50 percent of the required deflection at rated load. 4. Lateral Stiffness:  More than 80 percent of rated vertical stiffness. 5. Overload Capacity: Support 200 percent of rated load, fully compressed, without deformation or failure. 6. Elastomeric Element:  Molded, oil-resistant rubber or neoprene. 7. Coil Spring: Factory set and field adjustable for a maximum of .-inch movement at start and stop. I. For systems operating at +4 in. wg, provide a molded rubber duct expansion joint. Construction shall consist of an elastomer tube and cover, reinforced with a woven fabric capable of accommodating duct system movement and vibration. Expansion joints shall be Flexicraft Industries, Rubber Duct Expansion Joint Model. 2.11 ACCESS DOORS A. Hinged, gasketed and latched Access Doors (AD) and/or panels shall be installed at each fire and smoke damper, each duct mounted smoke detector, each valve, at each duct mounted balancing damper or any other mechanical equipment or device that requires accessibility. Doors and panels shall be sized (minimum 18" x 18", duct size allowing), and located to optimize access to dampers, detectors, and other equipment for service and replacement.  Access Panels (AP) in walls, ceilings or other surfaces shall be coordinated with architectural finishes and selected by the architect. B. Access doors shall be designed for five times the pressure of the duct in which it is mounted. C. Access doors for fire dampers, combination fire/smoke dampers and smoke dampers in medium pressure (+4 in.wg and higher) duct systems shall be the implosion type designed to prevent excessive negative pressure downstream resulting in collapsed ductwork. At the contractor’s option, the access door may be an integral feature of the damper assembly. D. Access doors for fire dampers, combination fire/smoke dampers and smoke dampers shall be permanently identified by a die-cut label with .” high red block letters on a white background. Label shall read FIRE DAMPER, COMBINATION FIRE/SMOKE DAMPER or SMOKE DAMPER. E. Duct-Mounted Access Doors: Fabricate access panels per SMACNA's “HVAC Duct Construction Standards -Metal and Flexible”; Figures 7-2 (7-2M), “Duct Access Doors and Panels,” and 7-3, “Access Doors -Round Duct”. 1. Basis-of-Design Product: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide Ductmate Industries, Inc.; Access Doors or comparable product by one of the following: a. American Warming and Ventilating; a division of Mestek, Inc. b. Ward Industries, Inc.; a division of Hart & Cooley, Inc. c. Prior Approved Equal 2. Door: a. Double wall, rectangular. b. Galvanized sheet metal with insulation fill and thickness as indicated for duct pressure class. c. Vision Panel: 1) Observation type doors shall be sandwich type provided at all fire and smoke dampers, humidifiers, in-duct smoke detectors, and UVC emitters. 2) Minimum 12"x12" with 8"x8" viewport, insulated or non-insulated. 3) For ducts smaller than 12-inches, 10"x6" shall be used with a 4"x 2-5/8" viewport with a single pane of safety glass. d. Hinges and Latches:  1"x1" butt or piano hinge with cam latches. e. Fabricate doors airtight and suitable for duct pressure class. 3. Frame:  Galvanized sheet steel, with bend-over tabs and foam gaskets. 4. Number of Hinges and Locks: a. Access Doors Less Than 12 inches Square: No hinges and two sash locks. b. Access Doors up to 18 inches Square: Continuous hinge and two sash locks. c. Access Doors up to 24 by 48 inches: Continuous hinge and two compression latches. d. Access Doors Larger Than 24 by 48 inches: Continuous hinge and two compression latches. F. Pressure Relief Access Door: 1. Manufacturers:  Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by the following: a. American Warming and Ventilating; a division of Mestek, Inc. b. Cesco Products; a division of Mestek, Inc. c. Elgen Manufacturing d. Flexmaster U.S.A., Inc. e. Greenheck Fan Corporation f. McGill AirFlow LLC g. Nailor Industries Inc. h. Pottorf i. Ventfabrics, Inc. j. Ward Industries, Inc.; a division of Hart & Cooley, Inc. k. Prior Approved Equal 2. Door and Frame Material: Galvanized sheet steel. 3. Door: Single or Double wall with insulation fill, as required, with metal thickness applicable for duct pressure class. 4. Operation: Open outward for positive-pressure ducts and inward for negative-pressure ducts. 5. Factory set at 3.0-to 8.0-in. wg. 6. Doors close when pressures are within set-point range. 7. Hinge:  Continuous piano 8. Latches:  Cam 9. Seal:  Neoprene or foam rubber 10. Insulation Fill:  1" thick, fibrous-glass or polystyrene-foam board. G. Duct Access Panel Assemblies: 1. Basis-of-Design Product: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide Ductmate Industries, Inc.; Ultimate Door or comparable product by one of the following: a. Flame Gard, Inc. b. Prior Approved Equal 2. UL 1978 listed by an NRTL 3. Panel and Frame:  Minimum thickness 0.0528-inch carbonsteel. 4. Fasteners: Carbon.  Panel fasteners shall not penetrate duct wall. 5. Gasket: Comply with NFPA 96; grease-tight, high-temperature ceramic fiber, rated for minimum 2000ºF. 6. Minimum Pressure Rating: 10-inch wg, positive or negative. 2.12 DUCT LINER A. Also refer to Section 23 07 00 -HVAC Insulation. B. Supply air ductwork a minimum of 15 linear feet downstream and return air ductwork a minimum of 15 linear feet upstream of low-pressure air handling equipment and terminal units shall be internally lined with 1." thick acoustical duct liner/insulation (minimum R-6 or greater where required by code), Johns Manville Linacoustic RC or approved equal. 1. Duct liner shall be securely fastened to ductwork with stick pins, speed washers and adhesive. 2. Leading edges of liner shall have a sheet metal nosing. 3. Exposed edges and butt joints shall be “buttered” with duct sealer. 4. Duct liner shall be interrupted at all fire, smoke, combination fire/smoke and radiation dampers. 5. Duct liner shall be interrupted not less than 6" upstream and 6" downstream of electric-resistance and fuel-burning heaters in a duct system. C. Supply air ductwork a minimum of 50 linear feet (or as indicated) downstream of static pressure class +4 in. wg air handling equipment shall be internally lined with 1." thick acoustical duct liner/insulation, (minimum R-6 or greater where required by code) Johns Manville Linacoustic RC or approved equal. Return air ductwork shall be lined as described in 2.13.B above or as indicated. D. Return air ductwork, sound boots and transfer ducts shall have 1" thick liner, Johns Manville Linacoustic RC or approved equal. 1. Refer to Section 23 07 00 -HVAC INSULATION for return air ductwork requiring external insulation. E. Indoor exposed rectangular sheet metal supply and return air ductwork shall be lined with 1" thick duct liner (minimum R-4 or greater where required by code) Johns Manville Linacoustic RC or equal. F. Indoor exposed round, spiral or flat oval ductwork shall be lined with 1" thick fiberglass duct liner/insulation (minimum R-4 or greater where required by code) Johns Manville Spiracoustic Plus or approved equal. G. Subject to compliance with requirements, duct liner products shall be manufactured by:  CertainTeed, Johns Manville, Knauf, Owens Corning, or approved equal. Camden Gulch  HASTINGS Project #21128  Camden  Construction Documents 2023.04.03  2.13  EMERGENCY GENERATOR EXHAUST SYSTEM  A. Factory-built modular exhaust system and published skin temperatures shall be laboratory tested and listed by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., for use with building heating equipment and appliances that produce exhaust flue gases at temperatures not exceeding 1400°F under continuous operating conditions. Exhaust system shall be designed to compensate for all flue gas induced thermal expansions. B. Exhaust system shall be double wall and have an outer jacket of Type 316 stainless steel, 0.025" thick in 6" through 24" diameters and 0.034" thick for diameters in excess of 24". The inner flue gas carrying conduit shall be Type 316 stainless steel.  The inner liner shall be 0.035" nominal thickness for all duct diameters. C. To control the venting pressure should a backfire occur, an explosion relief valve shall be incorporated in the exhaust system per NFPA 37 D. The exhaust system shall have a 2" thick fiber insulation between the outer jacket and the inner wall. Asbestos materials may not be used. E. Inner pipe joints shall be sealed by use of overlapping type V-band (P-OVB) with a premixed 200°F sealant (P-200E). The outer channel bands shall be sealed with a 600°F sealant (P-600) where exposed to weather. F. When the engine exhaust system is installed according to the manufacturer’s installation instructions and the limits of its listing, it shall comply with National Safety Standards and governing building code. G. The exhaust system shall terminate as shown on the drawings and per NFPA 37 and NFPA 211 requirements. H. All exhaust system parts exposed to the atmosphere shall be protected by a minimum of one base coat and one finish coat of paint, such as Series 4200 or 4300 heat resistant paint as manufactured by Rust-Oleum Corp. I. The exhaust system shall be installed as designed by the manufacturer and in accordance with the terms of the manufacturer’s 10-year warranty. Submit complete layout drawings and product information during the submittal phase. J. The exhaust system installation shall be complete including, but not limited to, all flashings, storm collars, miter cuts, supports, bracing, ventilated roof thimble, sealants, tensioners, wall guides, rings, tee cap, adapter, bellows, etc. Coordinate installation with roofing Contractor. K. Selkirk (Model IPS-C2) or approved equal by Jeremias or Metal Fab. Alternate system: Schedule 40 black steel pipe with 2" thick calcium silicate insulation and aluminum jacket is acceptable in lieu of the double wall system specified herein. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.01 INSTALLATION A. All ductwork shall be installed in accordance with applicable SMACNA Standards according to the pressure class described in PART 1 -GENERAL. B. Seal, inspect and test ductwork prior to insulating or concealing. Seal all ductwork and plenums to meet the following SMACNA duct seal class: 1. Class A: Seal all transverse joint, longitudinal seams, and duct wall penetrations. a. Pressure-sensitive tape shall not be used as the primary sealant, unless it has been certified to comply with UL 181A or UL 181B by an independent testing laboratory and the tape is used in accordance with that certification. b. All connections shall be sealed, including but not limited to spin-in fittings, taps, other branch connections, access doors, and duct connections to equipment. c. Sealing that would void product listings is not required. d. Spiral lock seams need not be sealed. 2. Tapes, sealants and mastics used to seal metallic and flexible air ducts and flexible air connectors shall comply with UL 181B and shall be marked “181B-FX” for pressure-sensitive tape or “181B-M” for mastic/sealant. 3. Mechanical fasteners for use with flexible nonmetallic air ducts shall comply with UL 181B and shall be marked “181B-C”. C. Ductwork shall be supported as recommended by SMACNA Standards from structural members. Ductwork shall not be allowed to rest on ceilings, light fixtures or structural members. Ductwork supported from joists shall be supported from the top chord of all joists. D. All ductwork accessories shall be installed in strict accordance with manufacturer’s recommendations. E. Ductwork that is designed to operate at static pressures in excess of 3 in. wg and all ductwork located outdoors shall be leak-tested in accordance with SMACNA Standards.  Representative sections totaling no less than 25% of the total installed duct area for the designated pressure class shall be tested. All sections shall be selected by the building owner or the designated representative of the building owner. Positive pressure leakage testing is acceptable for negative pressure ductwork. The maximum permitted duct leakage shall be: CL P 0.65 Lmax = where Lmax = maximum permitted leakage, cfm per100 ft2 of duct surface area CL = 4, duct leakage class, cfm per100 ft2 of duct surface area per inch of water0.65 P = test pressure, which shall be equal to the design duct pressure class rating, in. of water All ductwork seams shall be sealed with mastic to provide a system that is within the recommended SMACNA leakage limits. As an alternate, water-based spray-on hardcast products may be used provided they meet or exceed the project requirements. The ductwork test report shall be submitted in electronic (PDF) format to the Engineer prior to the Contractor’s request for final payment. F. All ductwork shall be cleaned inside and out prior to system start up and shall be left in a neat and orderly manner. G. Duct sizes shown on drawings are inside clear dimensions. H. Unless otherwise approved, ducts shall be true to dimensions indicated, straight and smooth on the inside with neatly finished joints, securely anchored to the building in an approved manner, and installed to be completely free from vibration under all conditions of operation. Exact routing of ductwork will be dependent on location of framing members. Route ductwork to avoid cutting framing members. I. Brace ducts not more than 60 inches on center.  J. Make slip joints in the direction of air flow. K. Offset ducts around obstructions where possible. Where duct must encompass obstruction, area of duct shall remain constant.  L. Duct tapers shall not exceed 1:4 ratio and transformations 30 degrees between air flow and diverging or converging air flow.  M. Provide access doors for access to all equipment, dampers and motors concealed by sheet metal. N. Where applicable, provide seismic bracing and restraints for ductwork per ASCE/SEI 7, latest edition and the latest edition of the SMACNA Seismic Restraint Manual. Also, refer to Section 23 05 48 Noise and Vibration Control. 3.02 BALANCING DAMPERS A. Install manual volume dampers where indicated on the drawings and where required to properly balance the air distribution system. B. Provide an opposed blade damper behind the face of each supply register which shall be adjustable through the face of the register with a screwdriver. C. Provide an opposed blade damper behind the face of return air registers, where indicated, which shall be adjustable through the face of the register with a screwdriver. D. Provide a butterfly damper in the neck of each ceiling diffuser unless noted otherwise. END OF SECTION 23 3100 SECTION 23 3400 -UNITARY EXHAUST AND SUPPLY FANS AND VENTILATORS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.01 DESCRIPTION A. Refer to specification section 23 00 00 -HVAC General, all of which applies to work described in this section as if written in full herein. Special attention should be given to Section 2.02 ELECTRICAL WORK for specifics on motor and drive requirements. B. Furnish and install all unitary exhaust and supply fans and ventilators of the size, type, capacity and characteristics as shown on the equipment schedules and herein described. C. Base fan-performance ratings on actual project site altitude. D. Acceptable manufacturers include only those whose products have been in satisfactory use in similar service for not less than five (5) years E. Electrical Standards: Provide electrical motors and products which have been listed and labeled by Underwriters Laboratories Inc. and comply with NEMA Standards. F. Certification, Fan Performance: Fans shall be certified to bear the AMCA label for air and sound performance. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.01 CENTRIFUGAL AND AXIAL FANS AND VENTILATORS A. All units shall be rigidly constructed of materials suitable for the intended service and shall be installed with all accessories listed on the Drawings B. All roof mounted units shall be installed on factory supplied 14-inch high (minimum) insulated roof curbs of the proper type, size and construction for proper mounting. Curbs shall account for all roof slopes and pitches so that the unit is installed level. Units shall be anchored to curbs by a minimum of two lag screws of adequate size on each side. Curbs shall be constructed of galvanized steel, except when the project is located within 5 miles of a sea coast they shall be of aluminum construction. C. Outdoor fans shall be completely weatherproof for outdoor installation and shall contain internal vibration isolation to assure smooth and quiet performance. D. Fan wheels and blades shall be constructed of aluminum and shall be statically and dynamically balanced at the factory. 2.02 CEILING-CENTRIFUGAL AND CABINET FANS A. Units shall be direct-drive type with back-draft damper, acoustically insulated cabinets and speed controller. 2.03 FANS USED IN SMOKE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS A. All fans that are part of a smoke management system shall carry a UL 793 Listing and shall be provided with all accessories/features required to meet that listing. B. All fans that are part of a smoke management system, including stair pressurization fans, shall be direct drive as a matter of first choice. C. Belt drive fans that are part of a smoke management system shall have 1.5 times the number of belts required for the design duty with the minimum number of belts being two (2).  PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.01 GENERAL A. All units shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer’s recommendations and as shown on the Drawings. B. Ceiling-centrifugal and cabinet fans shall be supported from structural members and shall not rest on the ceiling, on lights or on structural members. C. Units shall be interlocked and controlled as indicated on the Drawings. D. Ceiling-mounted units shall be installed with ceiling grilles flush with the ceiling. E. Curb-mounted fans shall be secured to the roof curb with lag screws in each hole in the fan curb cap. F. Electrical connection to the fan motor shall be made through the roof opening inside the roof curb. G. Replace fan and motor pulleys as required to achieve design airflow. UNITARY EXHAUST AND 23 3400 -1Jordan & Skala Engineers SUPPLY FANS AND VENTILATORS END OF SECTION 23 3400 Jordan & Skala Engineers SUPPLY FANS AND VENTILATORS UNITARY EXHAUST AND 23 3400 -2 SECTION 23 3700 -LOUVERS, GRILLES, REGISTERS AND DIFFUSERS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.01 DESCRIPTION A. All work in this section shall be subject to the provisions of Section 23 00 00 -HVAC General. B. Furnish and install all louvers, grilles, registers and diffusers of the size, type, capacity, and characteristics as shown on the equipment schedules and specified herein. C. Equipment schedules and specifications are intended to establish a minimum level of quality and workmanship for the project. When other than the basis of design equipment is proposed, the Contractor shall be responsible for all costs associated with engineering and construction modifications necessary in his or any other trade that may be required to satisfy the Contract Documents. D. Refer to the drawings for basis of design manufacturer and acceptable alternates. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.01 LOUVERS A. Louver components (heads, jambs, sills, blades, etc.) shall be factory assembled by the manufacturer into a complete unit. Louver sizes too large for shipping shall be built-up from factory assembled louver sections to provide the overall sizes required. B. Louver design shall incorporate structural supports required to withstand a wind load of 20 lbs./square foot. C. All louver performance data submitted for approval shall bear the AMCA Certified Ratings Seal for Air Performance and Water Penetration. D. All louvers shall have a factory applied finish coating as scheduled with the color selection made by the Architect at the time of shop drawing approval. Color charts shall be submitted with louver shop drawings. E. Screens: 1. General:  Provide a screen at each exterior louver. 2. Frames: Same kind and form of metal as indicated for louver to which screens are attached. 3. Screening material: a. Bird Screen:  Aluminum, ." by .” square mesh wire; 0.047" thick 2.02 GRILLES, REGISTERS AND DIFFUSERS A. Units shall be of the type, size, and construction as scheduled or indicated. B. Unless otherwise noted or indicated, all air devices shall be supplied with a factory finish of manufacturer’s standard white. C. Grilles, registers and diffusers shall be ordered with borders compatible with the ceiling system type in which they are installed. Refer to architectural drawings for type of ceiling and/or suspension system. D. Aluminum air devices shall be used for all areas subject to excessive moisture or humidity (e.g. showers, pools, bathrooms, etc.) PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.01 LOUVERS A. Louvers shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. B. The louver installation shall be made weatherproof by caulking and sealing at the frame and flanges in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. C. Combination louver/dampers shall be installed with the required actuators and linkage mechanisms and shall be field adjusted for full opening/closure stroke. Louvers shall be interlocked as scheduled or indicated. 3.02 GRILLES, REGISTERS AND DIFFUSERS A. All air devices located in ceiling tiles shall be centered or shall be on quarter points of 2 ft. x 2 ft. tiles. B. Where a line of sight allows the ductwork, wall, or ceiling structure to be seen behind any units, such ductwork, wall or ceiling structure shall be painted with nonflammable flat black paint to minimize visibility. C. All air devices not installed on T-bar ceiling grids shall be securely fastened to adjacent structures. D. Where air distribution devices are installed in inaccessible ceilings, provide the spin-in fitting without a volume damper. Provide an opposed blade damper in the neck of the air distribution device with access to the damper control through or at the face of the device. END OF SECTION 23 3700 SECTION 23 7400 -SINGLE PACKAGE ROOFTOP AIR CONDITIONERS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.01 DESCRIPTION A. All work in this section shall be subject to the provisions of Section 23 00 00 -HVAC General. B. Furnish and install factory assembled, piped and wired single package rooftop air conditioners of the type, operational characteristics and capacity as shown and scheduled and as specified herein. All rooftop units shall be by the same manufacturer.  The manufacturer shall have available factory trained service engineers and an inventory of replacement parts within a 100.mile radius of the job site. C. Refer to the drawings for basis of design manufacturer and acceptable alternates. D. Compressor shall be warranted against parts failure for five (5) years. E. Submit catalog cuts, certified performance data, and dimensional data. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.01 EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS F. Unit shall be designed specifically for outdoor installation with all exterior surfaces of phosphatized, zinc-coated steel with primer and baked enamel finish.  All components, including accessories shall be contained within the unit. G. Access to internal components shall be by removable gasketed access panels with quick release latches and lifting handles. H. Unit shall have factory installed lifting lugs capable of accepting standard lifting slings and spreader bars to facilitate hoisting. I. Electrical power connections shall be to a single point. J. Unit shall be insulated with a minimum of ." thick, 1. lb./ft3 density fiberglass insulation. Insulation shall have a microbial resistant neoprene coating. K. Unit shall be designed for curb mounting and mate with a full perimeter roof curb for a complete weather tight seal.  Curb shall be a minimum of 14" high and manufactured of 12-gauge zinc-coated steel and be supplied by the unit manufacturer with a wood nailer strip and full perimeter gasket. Unit sides shall overhang the curb to form a protective drip lip. Supply and return ducts shall connect to the curb prior to placement of the unit. The manufacturer shall furnish gasketing materials for a leak-tight seal between the unit and duct connections. 2.02 HEATING SECTION A. Provide aluminized steel or stainless steel slotted port gas burners and stainless steel heat exchanger as scheduled. Warranty on heat exchanger shall be 10 years. Minimum 4:1 modulation. 2.03 COMPRESSOR A. Fully hermetic scroll or rotary compressor(s) shall be provided with capacity reduction of a minimum of 50% on units 7. tons and larger.  B. A crankcase heater shall be provided and wired to be active continuously. C. The compressor shall be provided with spring isolators and flexible discharge line and hot gas muffler. D. Motor shall be specifically designed for operation within a refrigerant atmosphere.  Inlet screens shall be provided.  Motor shall be capable of starting and continuously operating at ambient temperatures as high as 120ºF.  Motor shall have overload protection and internal thermostats. Jordan & Skala Engineers SINGLE PACKAGE ROOFTOP 01 7400 -1 Camden Construction Documents 2023.04.03 E. Compressor motor shall be capable of withstanding voltage fluctuations of plus or minus 10% of name plate voltage. F. Provide hotgas reheat for humidity control. G. REFRIGERATION CIRCUIT H. The unit shall be certified as complying with AHRI Standard 210/240 or 340/360 and bear the AHRI seal. I. The evaporator coil shall consist of 3/8" O.D. copper tubes mechanically bonded to aluminum plate fins and be pressure and leak tested at 425 psig.  Condenser fans shall be statically and dynamically balanced.  Fan motors shall be UL Listed for outdoor use, have built-in thermal overload protection and permanently lubricated bearings.  Condensing section shall be designed for a maximum of 130ºF condensing temperature with ambient air at 95ºF.  Coil shall be circuited for sub-cooling. J. Unit shall incorporate an insulated and sealed IAQ drain pan with threaded drain connections at each end of the unit. The Contractor shall install P-traps. Overflow protection shall be provided via a float switch wired to shut the unit off if liquid is detected. K. Refrigeration controls shall include as a minimum, high and low pressure control, compressor winding thermostat and overload, lockout circuit re-settable at the unit thermostat, contactors for condenser/evaporator fans and compressor, and 24 volt control power transformer. L. Unit shall ship with an operating charge of R-410A. 2.04 EVAPORATOR FANS A. Evaporator fan shall be direct driven or belt driven forward curved type with an adjustable sheave and motor sized to meet the air flow and static pressure as scheduled. B. Fans assembly shall be isolated from the unit on rubber-in-shear or spring type isolators. C. Motor shall have thermal overload protection and motor and fan bearings shall be permanently lubricated. D. Fan wheel shall be protected from corrosion with a painted finish. 2.05 FILTERS A. Two (2) sets of 2" low velocity filters shall be provided with the unit.  Filters shall be MERV 8 and MERV 13, pleated, disposable type equal to Farr 30/30 or as scheduled. B. Only one size filter per unit is allowed. C. During construction, the initial set of filters will be installed along with temporary media consisting of two plys of polyester fibers; 1." (32mm) thick with a non-migrating tackified surface having a MERV 8 rating. 1. For non-ducted (plenum return) systems, use roll filter media over each inlet duct. 2. For ducted systems, use precut pads with holding frames installed at each return air register or grille. 2.06 ACCESSORIES TO BE PROVIDED A. Accessories noted below may or may not be required for equipment scheduled. Refer to the equipment schedules on the drawings for specific accessory requirements. B. 7-day programmable thermostat with clear plastic locking cover. C. Thermostat sub-base with fan ON-AUTO and HEAT-OFF-COOL control. D. Programmable/Lockable Averaging Thermostat/Humidistat with Interlocked Temperature/Humidity Sensor. Jordan & Skala Engineers SINGLE PACKAGE ROOFTOP 01 7400 -2 E. Non-fused disconnect switch. F. Low leakage dampers. G. Outside air intake hood with inlet screen. H. Manual outside air volume damper. I. Propeller exhaust fan and low leakage damper. J. Anti-cycling timer to provide 5-minute delay between compressor shut-down and restart. K. Enthalpy controlled economizer cycle with minimum position rheostat including dampers with modulating controllers and spring return operators. L. Demand controlled ventilation -A CO2 sensor shall also be provided . The CO2 sensor shall be wired to the rooftop unit economizer such that on a CO2 level rise the outside air damper shall modulate until the CO2 level returns below setpoint which shall return the outside air damper back to normal operation. The CO2 sensor manufacturer shall be the same as the rooftop unit manufacturer. M. Remote control panel with fan and system controls, and indicating lights for system operation and dirty filter. N. Hail Guards. O. Air flow monitoring station PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.01 EQUIPMENT A. Unit shall be shipped with a full refrigerant charge. B. Unit shall be run tested at factory before shipping. 3.02 INSTALLATION A. Unit shall be installed level within manufacturer’s recommendations. B. The second set of filters shall be installed after the unit has been cleaned and testing and balancing has been completed. END OF SECTION 01 7400 Jordan & Skala Engineers SINGLE PACKAGE ROOFTOP 01 7400 -3 SECTION 23 7433 -100% OUTSIDE AIR ROOFTOP UNITS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.01 DESCRIPTION A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and other Division 1 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. B. Furnish and install factory assembled, piped and wired packaged 100% Outside Air Rooftop Units of the size, type, capacity and characteristics as shown on the equipment schedules and herein described. All units shall be by the same manufacturer. The manufacturer shall have available factory trained service engineers and an inventory of replacement parts within a 100-mile radius of the job site. C. Equipment schedules and specifications are intended to establish a minimum level of quality and workmanship for the project. When other than the basis of design equipment is proposed, the Contractor shall be responsible for all costs associated with engineering and construction modifications necessary in his or any other trade that may be required to satisfy the Contract Documents. D. Refer to the drawings for basis of design manufacturer and acceptable alternates. E. Substitution Request: Manufacturers of alternate equipment must be approved to bid via addendum, in writing by the specifying Engineer, at least two (2) weeks prior to bid time in order for their bid to be accepted. Substitution request form from the Division 01 specifications shall be submitted to the Architect along with supporting data citing any deviations from the contract documents.  Refer to paragraph C. above. F. The manufacturer must have been a manufacturer of packaged 100% outside air equipment for at least five (5) years prior to bid time. 1.02 SUBMITTALS A. Submittal documents shall be prepared by the manufacturer in accordance with Division 01 requirements. B. Submittal package shall include the following as a minimum: 1. Data sheets for all system components 2. Fan selections with performance curves at site conditions 3. Storage and handling requirements and recommendations 4. Electrical characteristics 5. Wiring diagrams 6. Installation, Operation and Maintenance manual 7. AHRI Rating Certificates for actual equipment to be installed 8. Manufacturer’s warranty 9. Sound-power level ratings C. Shop Drawings: Detailed equipment assemblies and indicate dimensions, weights, loadings, required clearances, method of field assembly, components, and location and size of each field connection. Detail mounting, securing, and flashing of roof curb to roof structure.  Indicate coordinating requirements with roof membrane system.  D. Commissioning Reports: Submit copies of pre-commissioning checklists. 1.03 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Fabricate and label refrigeration system to comply with ASHRAE 15, “Safety Code for Mechanical Refrigeration.” B. Energy Efficiency Ratio (EER): Equal to or greater than prescribed by ASHRAE 90.1, “Energy Efficient Design of New Buildings except Low-Rise Residential Buildings.” C. Packaged air-cooled condenser units shall be certified in accordance with ANSI/AHRI Standard 340/360 performance rating of commercial and industrial unitary air-conditioning and heat pump equipment. D. Listing and Labeling: Provide electrically operated components specified in this Section that are listed and labeled. 1. The rooftop unit(s) shall be safety certified by an accredited testing laboratory and the nameplate shall carry the label of the certification agency. 2. Unit shall be certified in accordance with UL Standard 1995/CSA C22.2 No. 236, Safety Standard for Heating and Cooling Equipment. 3. Unit shall be certified in accordance with ANSI Z21.47b/CSA 2.3b and ANSI Z83.8/CSA 2.6, Safety Standard Gas-Fired Furnaces. 4. Unit shall be safety certified by ETL and ETL US listed. Unit nameplate shall include the ETL/ETL Canada label. E. The manufacturer shall ensure replacement parts are available for a minimum of ten (10) years from the date of project turnover to the owner. 1.04 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Deliver rooftop units as factory-assembled units with protective crating and covering as recommended by the manufacturer. B. Coordinate delivery of units in sufficient time to allow movement into building. C. Handle rooftop units to comply with manufacturer’s written rigging and installation instructions for unloading and moving to final location. 1.05 COORDINATION A. Coordinate installation of roof curbs, equipment supports, and roof penetrations with roof construction.  Roof specialties are specified in Division 7 sections. 1.06 WARRANTY A. A written warranty shall be executed by the manufacturer and signed by the Contractor, agreeing to replace components that fail in materials or workmanship, within the specified warranty period, provided manufacturer’s written instructions for installation, operation, and maintenance have been followed. 1. Warranty Period—Rooftop Unit: Manufacturer’s standard, not less than one (1) year after date of startup. 2. Warranty Period—Compressors: Manufacturer’s extended 5-year warranty, parts only. 3. Warranty Period—Heat Exchangers: Manufacturer’s non-prorated full parts replacement not less than 10-years from date of shipment. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.01 ROOFTOP UNITS A. Description: 1. Self-Contained: Factory-assembled and tested, designed for roof installation, and consisting of compressors, condenser coils, evaporator coils, condenser and evaporator fans, refrigeration, temperature controls, gas-fired heater, filters, and dampers. B. Construction: 1. Unit shall be completely factory-assembled, piped and wired and shipped in one section. 2. Unit shall be specifically designed for 100% outdoor air roof top application with a fully weatherproof cabinet. 3. All cabinet walls, access doors, roof and floor shall be a high performance 2-inch thick composite panel (foamed) constructed with G90 galvanized steel on both sides and a closed cell polyurethane foam interior core providing a rigid, impact-resistant surface. Foam shall have a minimum density of 2 pounds per cubic feet. All foam material shall be tested in accordance with ASTM D-1929 for a minimum flash ignition temperature of 610 degrees F. All panels shall have a thermal break with no metal path from inside to outside. 4. Paint finish shall be capable of withstanding at least 2,000 hours, with no visible corrosive effects, when tested in a salt spray and fog atmosphere in accordance with ASTM B 117-95 test procedure. 5. Unit-specific color-coded wiring diagrams shall match the unit color-coded wiring and will be provided in both point-to-point and ladder form. 6. Diagrams shall also be laminated in plastic and permanently affixed inside the control compartment. 7. Access to filters, heating section, and other items needing periodic checking or maintenance shall be through insulated hinged access doors with quarter turn lockable latches. Door fastening screws are not acceptable. The blower access door shall be bolted closed. 8. Access doors shall have stainless steel hinges and full perimeter gasketing. 9. All openings through the base pan of the unit shall have upturned flanges of at least ." in height around the opening through the base pan. 10. Air side service access doors shall have rain break overhangs. 11. Unit shall have decals and tags to indicate unit lifting and rigging, service areas and caution areas. Installation and maintenance manuals shall be supplied with each unit. C. Supply Fans: 1. The fan(s) shall be direct drive single width single inlet un-housed airfoil centrifugal, plenum fan(s). Supply fans shall have all aluminum construction. Fans attached to 1,170 rpm motors shall be rated for a minimum of 1,200 RPM maximum speed. Direct drive fans shall be directly connected to and supported by the motor shaft. Motor bearings shall be rated for 200,000 hours service and shall have external lubrication connections. Fans and motors shall be dynamically balanced, and the entire fan assembly shall be mounted on rubber vibration isolators.  D. Outside Air 1. Shall be 100% outside air with no return air or damper assembly. 2. The unit shall be provided with an intake air rain hood with washable aluminum mesh filters. 3. A Class 1 motorized damper shall be installed on the outside air inlet. E. Air-Cooled Condenser: 1. The condensing section shall be equipped with vertical discharge axial flow direct drive fans. Direct drive fans shall be directly connected to and supported by the motor shaft. 2. The condenser coils shall be sloped at least 30 degrees to protect the coils from damage. 3. Condenser coils shall be copper tubes with aluminum fins mechanically bonded to the tubes. 4. Condenser coils to be sized for a minimum of 10°F of refrigerant sub-cooling. F. Filters: 1. Filters shall be 4-inch thick, pleated fiberglass, disposable type with an ASHRAE efficiency of 90% (MERV 13) and a 2-in thick, pleated fiberglass, disposable type with ASHRAE efficiency of 30%(MERV 8) infront of the MERV 13 filter for protection. G. Cooling and Dehumidification Coils 1. Evaporator and hot gas reheat coils shall be copper tube with aluminum fins mechanically bonded to the tubes. 2. Hot gas reheat coil shall be designed to produce 72F, 55% RH discharge air in dehumidification mode of operation. 3. Evaporator coils shall have galvanized steel end casings. 4. Evaporator coils shall have equalizing type vertical tube headers. 5. Evaporator coils shall be furnished with a thermostatic expansion valve. 6. Evaporator coils shall be furnished with a double sloped insulated drain pan for positive drainage of condensate; drain pan shall be constructed of 304 stainless steel. A float switch or water level detection device shall be factory installed to provide overflow protection. 7. A plugged drain fitting shall be provided on each side of the unit for field installation of the condensate trap. H. Refrigeration System 1. Compressors shall be scroll type with internal thermal overload protection and mounted on the compressor manufacturer’s recommended rubber vibration isolators.  Each compressor shall have independent refrigerant circuits. 2. Compressors shall be mounted in an isolated compartment to permit operation of the unit without affecting air flow when the door to the compartment is open. 3. Compressors shall be isolated from the base pan and supply air to avoid any transmission of noise from the compressor into the building area. 4. System shall be equipped with thermostatic expansion valve type refrigerant flow control. 5. System shall be equipped with automatic reset low pressure and manual reset high pressure refrigerant controls. Unit shall be equipped with Schrader type service fittings on both the high side and low pressure sides of the system. 6. Unit shall be equipped with refrigerant liquid line driers. 7. Unit shall be fully factory-charged with refrigerant. 8. Hot gas bypass shall be provided on all refrigerant circuits. 9. Each compressor shall be individually staged for capacity control. 10. All circuits shall be equipped with liquid line sight glasses. 11. Unit shall be provided with a hot gas reheat coil and modulating hot gas reheat control valve piped to the lead refrigerant system. I. Gas-fired Heating Section 1. Unit shall be provided with a staged (3:1 turndown minimum) indirect gas-fired furnace consisting of a stainless-steel heat exchanger with multiple concavities, an induced draft blower and an electric pressure switch to lockout the gas valve until the combustion chamber is purged and combustion air flow is established. 2. Unit shall be provided with a gas ignition system consisting of an electronic igniter to a pilot system, which will be continuous when the heater is operating, but will shut off the pilot when heating is not required. 3. Unit shall have gas supply piping entrances in the unit base for through-the-curb gas piping and in the outside cabinet wall for across-the-roof gas piping. 4. The gas heat exchanger shall carry a 10-year non pro-rated warranty. 5. The manufacturer shall furnish an integral control box containing thermal cutouts, primary control, sub-circuit fusing, airflow switch, and fused control transformer. 6. Electric heaters shall be UL listed for zero clearance and shall meet all applicable NEC requirements. 7. Units with electric heat sections shall be listed under UL 1995 Standard for Safety. J. Controls 1. Provide a factory-mounted and wired makeup air unit (MAU) controller. MUA programmable controller shall be internal to the rooftop unit and shall include a 7.day, 2 events per day scheduler, 14-day holiday schedule, optimal start and outputs for heating and cooling. The outside air temperature and the humidity sensors shall be factory-mounted. The unit manufacturer shall provide the supply air temperature sensor for field installation by others. 2. The unit manufacturer shall provide the supply air temperature sensors for field installation by others. 3. The controller shall be BACnet compatible. 4. The controller shall accept inputs for up to two remote temperature sensors (located on the top two floors). Temperature readings shall be averaged. 5. Airflow monitoring shall be required in the outdoor airstreams. K. Electrical Features 1. Unit shall be provided with a factory-installed and wired internal disconnect. 2. Unit shall be provided with phase and brown-out protection to shut down all motors in the unit if the phases are more than 10% out of balance on voltage, or the voltage is more than 10% under design voltage or on phase reversal. 3. Unit shall be provided with a factory-installed and wired 115-volt, 15-amp ground fault service receptacle powered with a 1.5 kVA transformer. 2.02 ROOF CURBS A. Roof curbs shall be constructed of galvanized steel. Curbs are to be fully gasketed between the curb top and unit bottom with the curb providing full perimeter support, cross structure support and air seal for the unit. Curb gasketing shall be furnished within the control compartment of the rooftop unit to be mounted on the curb immediately before mounting of the rooftop unit. Provide fiberglass sound deadening pad between curb and RTU; Kinetics Noise Control “KIP-RT” or prior approved equal. Unit shall be mounted on a factory-furnished acoustical style solid bottom roof curb with scoop, fully lined with 1 inch of foil faced neoprene coated, fiberglass insulation and with a wood nailer strip. Line inside and bottom of curb with an acoustical barrier; Kinetics KNM-100B or prior approved equal. B. Provide spring isolator at the curb. Minimum 2” deflection. For fans with internal springs, lock up the internal springs. C. Rooftop units with down discharge and side curb supply air outlet shall be provided with an extended height curb.curb D. Units having extended height curb exceeding 30" from top of finished roof shall be provided with a service platform, ladder and guard rails at all service access points. E. Coordinate with the roof system used so that a minimum of 8" of the curb is above the finished roof for flashing purposes. The top of the curb shall be level and the slope of the roof shall be compensated for by the curb. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.01 GENERAL A. Unit shall be run tested at factory before shipping. B. Unit shall be shipped with a full charge of refrigerant. C. Comply with manufacturer’s printed instructions except where more stringent requirements are shown or specified, and except where a manufacturer’s technical representative directs otherwise. Install unit where shown on the Drawings. Provide clearances required by the manufacturer around sides of unit for proper airflow and service. D. Provide and install all water piping, drains and controls for proper operation of unit. E. Unit shall be installed level. F. Install new clean filters prior to start-up. 3.02 START-UP A. All units shall be thoroughly cleaned by the installing contractor in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions prior to being placed into service. B. Do not start unit without new clean filters in place. C. Start-up service shall be provided by the equipment manufacturer’s authorized representative and shall include complete testing of all controls and unit operation. The agency responsible for start-up shall record the refrigeration pressures and electrical operating data. Copies of this data are to be supplied to the Owner. D. Verify fan rotation and motor amperage. E. Prepare a written star-up report that records the results of tests and inspections. F. After test and balance has been completed, install new clean filters. 3.03 TRAINING A. The manufacturer’s authorized representative shall provide on-site training for the Owner’s maintenance personnel for a period of not less than four (4) hours as follows: 1. Instruct the Owner’s designated operating personnel in the proper operation and maintenance of the equipment as well as the operation and maintenance of the controls for the various systems in the building. Informal or unwitnessed instructions, or instructions to non-designated personnel, will not be acceptable.  Prior arrangements for instruction periods shall be made with the Owner two (2) weeks ahead of the actual training. 2. In depth review of the IOM manual shall be conducted. B. IOM manuals shall be supplied for each unit located in a metal pocket in the control access compartment. END OF SECTION 23 7433 SECTION 23 8128 -SPLIT SYSTEM HEAT PUMPS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.01 DESCRIPTION A. All work specified herein shall be accomplished in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section 23 00 00 -HVAC General. B. Furnish and install a direct expansion air-to-air heat pump unit of the size and capacity shown on the equipment schedule. The unit shall be completely factory assembled and tested, and shall include compressor, indoor and outdoor coils, stand-by electric strip heating coils, fan motors as required, pre-wired controls, interconnecting refrigerant tubing, wiring, and circuit breakers. Condensing unit shall be factory matched with evaporator coils and air handling unit; units shall be rated in accordance with AHRI and UL Listed. C. Equipment schedules and specifications are intended to establish a minimum level of quality and workmanship for the project. When other than the basis of design equipment is proposed, the Contractor shall be responsible for all costs associated with engineering and construction modifications necessary in his or any other trade that may be required to satisfy the Contract Documents. D. Refer to the drawings for basis of design manufacturer and acceptable alternates. 1.02 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. piping, valves, accessories and piping insulation refer to Section 23 23 00 – Refrigerant Piping. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.01 GENERAL A. Each unit shall be a complete and factory package consisting of compressor, condenser coil, stand-by electric heating coil, condenser fans and motors, refrigeration and temperature controls, Unit shall have a certified AHRI rating. B. AIR HANDLER C. The cabinet shall be complete and constructed of minimum 20-gauge galvanized steel zinc coated and shall be painted with a baked-on powder coating finish. Interior surface of the cabinet shall be lined with a flexible acoustical and thermal insulation and shall be fire proof. Thickness of insulation shall be 1-1/2". Access to fan motor, filters, coils, controls and power supply shall be through the front panel of the unit. D. The nonferrous direct expansion cooling coil shall be factory mounted and charged with refrigerant. Provide reversing valve, expansion valve, solenoid valve and complete refrigeration circuit. Provide insulated drain pan with exterior primary and secondary drain connection. E. The air handling unit shall accept a 1" thick high velocity air filter, mounted internally and located upstream of the cooling coil. F. The blower section shall have an adjustable V-belt or direct drive fan motor with a forward-curved centrifugal type blower mounted on vibration isolators. The fan motor shall have thermal overloads and be permanently lubricated. Direct drive fan motors shall have at least three (3) speeds. G. An electric resistance heater shall supplement the heat pump operation. H. The unit shall be supplied with a single point power connection. 2.02 OUTDOOR UNIT A. The cabinet shall be constructed of galvanized steel with a baked-on enamel finish.  Provide with removable access panel at one side of unit to access the compressor, coil, controls, and power supply. Drain holes shall be provided at the base of the unit.  Provide fan and coil guards. B. The compressor shall be the hermetic scroll or rotary type, furnished with complete refrigeration circuit(s) including nonferrous condenser coil, receiver, charging valve, refrigerant holding charge, external service valves, compressor anti-cycle protection, internal temperature and current-sensing overloads, crankcase heater, filter drier, evaporator freeze stat, liquid line solenoid valve, and vibration isolation. Controls shall include over and under voltage protection, high pressure cutout with auto-reset, motor starters and contactors.  Compressor shall have a five-year warranty. Jordan & Skala Engineers SPLIT SYSTEM HEAT PUMPS 23 8128 -1 C. The fan motor shall be permanently lubricated with built-in thermal overload protection. D. Install unit level as indicated on the Drawings. E. The unit shall be supplied with a single point power connection. 2.03 CONTROLS A. Unless noted otherwise, provide a seven-day programmable thermostat with manual changeover for dwelling units and automatic changeover for public spaces. Thermostat in the public spaces shall have locking covers or temperature adjustment limit to allow only authorized user to adjust the thermostat in the public spaces. B. The thermostat shall prevent the auxiliary electric heat from being energized whenever the heating load can be met by the heat pump. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.01 GENERAL A. Units shall be installed as shown on the Drawings and in strict accordance with manufacturer’s recommendations. B. Units shall be installed level. C. Units shall be installed to allow adequate service to all components. END OF SECTION 23 8128 Jordan & Skala Engineers SPLIT SYSTEM HEAT PUMPS 23 8128 -2 SECTION 23 8128.12 -DUCTLESS COOLING ONLY SPLIT SYSTEMS (1 to 3. TONS) PART 1 -GENERAL 1.01 DESCRIPTION A. All work specified herein shall be accomplished in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section 23 00 00 -HVAC General. B. Furnish and install direct expansion air-to-air split system cooling only units of the size and capacity shown on the equipment schedule. The unit shall be completely factory assembled and tested, and shall include variable speed compressor, indoor and outdoor coils, fan motors, wireless or wired remote controller, interconnecting refrigerant tubing, and power and control wiring. The outdoor unit shall be of the inverter driven design and factory matched with the indoor unit. C. Equipment schedules and specifications are intended to establish a minimum level of quality and workmanship for the project. When other than the basis of design equipment is proposed, the Contractor shall be responsible for all costs associated with engineering and construction modifications necessary in his or any other trade that may be required to satisfy the Contract Documents. D. Refer to the drawings for basis of design manufacturer and acceptable alternates. 1.02 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. For piping, valves, accessories and piping insulation refer to Section 23 23 00 – Refrigerant Piping. 1.03 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. The units shall be tested by a Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory (NRTL) and shall bear the ETL label. B. All wiring shall be in accordance with the National Electrical Code (NEC). C. The units shall be rated in accordance with Air-Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Institute’s (AHRI) Standard 210/240 and bear the AHRI Certification label. D. The units shall be manufactured in a facility registered to ISO 9001 and ISO 14001. E. A dry air holding charge shall be provided in the indoor section. F. System efficiency shall meet or exceed the scheduled values. G. Delivery, Storage and Handling 1. Equipment shall be stored and handled according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. 2. The controller shall be able to withstand a storage temperature of 105°F and 95% relative humidity without any adverse effects. 1.04 SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: Include performance data (including extended capacity ratings if other than AHRI standard conditions are scheduled); installation, operation and maintenance manual; operating characteristics; furnished specialties; and accessories. B. Submit AHRI Certificates. 1.05 COORDINATION A. Coordinate size, weight and location with Architectural and Structural drawings. Where concrete pads are indicated, conform to Division 03 for concrete, reinforcement, and formwork requirements. 1.06 WARRANTY A. The indoor and outdoor units shall carry a manufacturer’s standard parts and defects warranty for a period five (5) years from the date of installation. The compressor shall carry a warranty of seven (7) years from the same date of installation. If, during this period, any part should fail to function properly due to defects in workmanship or material, it shall be replaced or repaired at the discretion of the manufacturer.  PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.01 INDOOR UNITS A. The indoor units shall be following types: wall mount, ceiling recessed cassette, ceiling suspended and horizontal ducted. All indoor units shall be factory assembled, wired and run tested. Contained within the unit shall be all factory wiring, piping, control circuit board, fan and fan motor. The unit shall have a self-diagnostic function, 3-minute time delay mechanism, and an auto restart function after power interruption. Indoor unit shall be purged with dry air before shipment from factory. B. Wall Mount Type: 1. Unit Cabinet: a. The cabinet shall be formed from high strength molded plastic with smooth finish, flat front panel design with access for filter. Cabinet color shall be white. b. A separate metal installation plate that secures the indoor unit firmly to the wall shall be furnished with the unit. The installation plate shall be securely attached to the wall using an appropriate anchoring method for the wall type the unit will be attached to. 2. Fan: a. The fan shall be a high performance direct drive double inlet forward curved sirocco type design driven by a single motor. The fan shall be statically and dynamically balanced and be powered by a motor with permanently lubricated bearings. b. The fan shall have three (3) speeds: Low, Mid, High and Auto. The fan shall have a selectable Auto fan setting that will adjust the fan speed based on the difference between controller set-point and space temperature. 3. Directional Air Flow Vane: An integral, motorized multi-position vane shall automatically direct air flow in a horizontal and downward direction to provide uniform air distribution. 4. Filter: Return air shall be filtered by means of an easily removable washable filter. 5. Coil: a. The indoor unit coil shall be of nonferrous construction with pre-coated aluminum strake fins on copper tubing. The multi-angled heat exchanger shall have a modified fin shape that reduces air resistance for a smoother, quieter airflow.  b. All tube joints shall be brazed with PhosCopper or silver alloy. c. The coils shall be pressure tested at the factory.  d. A condensate pan and drain shall be provided under the coil. e. A condensate mini-pump shall be provided when scheduled to provide a means of condensate disposal when a gravity drain is not available. C. Ceiling Recessed Cassette Type: 1. Unit Cabinet: a. The cabinet shall be formed from galvanized sheet metal coated with high-density foam insulation. The cabinet shall be designed for recessed mounting and provided with four (4) corner mounting supports behind removable corner pockets located in the grille assembly allowing adjustment of mounting height from the front of the unit. b. The cabinet panel shall have provisions for a field installed filtered outside air intake. c. The cabinet shall have a knock-out for the connection of a branch supply air duct to condition a secondary space. d. The cabinet shall have an optional multi-function casement which will mount between the unit cabinet and the Grille assembly to provide a second field installed filtered outside air intake and provide a mount for a high-efficiency filter element. e. A separate grille assembly shall be attached to the front of the cabinet with supply air vanes to supply air in four directions. The four-way grill shall allow two, three or four-way blow. The grille vane angles shall be individually adjustable from the wired remote controller. The return air intake shall be located in the center section of the grille. The grille assembly shall be white. 2. Fan: a. The fan shall be a direct drive turbo propeller design driven by a single motor. The fan shall be statically and dynamically balanced and be powered by a motor with permanently lubricated bearings. b. The fan shall have four (4) speeds: Low, Mid1, Mid2, High and Auto. The fan shall have a selectable Auto fan setting that will adjust the fan speed based on the difference between controller set-point and space temperature. 3. Directional Air Flow Vane: An integral, motorized multi-position vane shall automatically direct air flow in a horizontal and downward direction to provide uniform air distribution. 4. Filter: a. Return air shall be filtered by means of an easily removable washable filter. 5. Coil: a. The indoor unit coil shall be of nonferrous construction with pre-coated aluminum strake fins on copper tubing.  The heat exchanger shall have a modified fin shape that reduces air resistance for a smoother, quieter airflow.  b. All tube joints shall be brazed with PhosCopper or silver alloy. c. The coils shall be pressure tested at the factory.  d. A condensate pan and drain shall be provided under the coil. e. A condensate mini-pump shall be provided when scheduled to provide a means of condensate disposal when a gravity drain is not available. D. Ceiling Suspended Type: 1. Unit Cabinet: a. The cabinet shall be formed from high strength molded plastic. Cabinet color shall be white. b. The cabinet shall be designed for overhead suspension mounting and horizontal operation. c. The unit shall have removable mounting brackets. A mounting template with suspension bolt locations shall be furnished with the unit. Mounting bolts or threaded rod of 3/8" diameter shall be used to suspend the unit and the unit shall not require direct contact with the ceiling for proper operation. d. The rear cabinet panel shall have knock-out provisions for a field installed filtered 4-5/16" diameter ventilation air intake connection. 2. Fan: a. The fan assembly shall have multiple high performance direct drive double inlet forward curved sirocco type wheels driven by a single motor. The fan shall be statically and dynamically balanced and be powered by a motor with permanently lubricated bearings. b. The fan shall have four (4) speeds: Low, Mid1, Mid2, High and Auto. The fan shall have a selectable Auto fan setting that will adjust the fan speed based on the difference between controller set-point and space temperature. Jordan & Skala Engineers DUCTLESS COOLING ONLY 23 8128.18 -3 3. Directional Air Flow Vane: An integral, motorized multi-position vane shall automatically direct air flow in a horizontal and downward direction to provide uniform air distribution. 4. Filter: a. Return air shall be filtered by means of an easily removable washable filter. b. An optional MERV 8 filter shall be provided. 5. Coil: a. The indoor unit coil shall be of nonferrous construction with pre-coated aluminum strake fins on copper tubing. The multi-angled heat exchanger shall have a modified fin shape that reduces air resistance for a smoother, quieter airflow.  b. All tube joints shall be brazed with PhosCopper or silver alloy. c. The coils shall be pressure tested at the factory.  d. A condensate pan and drain shall be provided under the coil. e. An optional drain lift mechanism, capable of lifting condensate 23-5/8" above the drain pan shall be provided. 6. Electrical: a. The unit electrical characteristics shall be 208/230 volts, 1-phase, 60 hertz. b. The indoor unit will be powered directly from the outdoor unit. c. The indoor unit shall not have any supplemental electric heat. E. Horizontal Ducted Type: 1. Unit Cabinet: a. The cabinet shall be the space saving, low profile, horizontal, ducted type. Formed cabinet shall be constructed of G-60 galvanized steel with factory applied foam surface insulation to prevent condensation on the outer surfaces. The cabinet shall be designed for overhead suspension mounting and horizontal operation. b. The cabinet shall be provided with four mounting brackets to accommodate suspension from threaded rod or structural supports located on the side panels at all four corners. Brackets shall be suitable for supporting the weight of the indoor unit. The cabinet shall be equipped with a ducted air outlet and ducted rear return air connection. c. The rear cabinet panel shall have knock-out provisions for a field installed filtered 3-5/16" diameter ventilation air intake connection. 2. Fan: a. The fan assembly shall have multiple high performance direct drive double inlet forward curved sirocco type wheels driven by a single motor. The fan shall be statically and dynamically balanced and be powered by a motor with permanently lubricated bearings. b. The fan shall have three (3) speeds: Low, Mid, High and Auto. The fan shall have a selectable Auto fan setting that will adjust the fan speed based on the difference between controller set-point and space temperature. 3. Filter: a. Return air shall be filtered by means of a standard factory installed return air filter. b. An optional filter rack assembly with replaceable 2" thick MERV 10 pleated filters, filter access panels, and mounting connections for connection to the indoor unit shall be provided. 4. Coil: Jordan & Skala Engineers DUCTLESS COOLING ONLY 23 8128.18 -4 a. The indoor unit coil shall be of nonferrous construction with smooth plate fins on copper tubing. The multi-angled heat exchanger shall have a modified fin shape that reduces air resistance for a smoother, quieter airflow.  b. All tube joints shall be brazed with PhosCopper or silver alloy. c. The coils shall be pressure tested at the factory.  d. A condensate pan and drain shall be provided under the coil. e. In addition to the gravity drain, the unit shall be provided with an integral condensate lift mechanism able to raise the condensate above the pan. The lift mechanism shall incorporate a safety sensor system to shut down the indoor fan and the outdoor unit in the event a high level of condensate is detected in the drain pan. 5. Electrical: a. The unit electrical characteristics shall be 208/230 volts, 1-phase, 60 hertz. b. The indoor unit will be powered directly from the outdoor unit. c. The indoor unit shall not have any supplemental electric heat. 2.02 OUTDOOR UNIT A. General: 1. The outdoor unit shall be specifically designed and matched to operate with the indoor unit. The outdoor unit shall be completely factory assembled, piped and wired and run tested at the factory. 2. The outdoor unit shall be equipped with an electronic control board that interfaces with the indoor unit to perform all necessary operation functions.  3. The unit shall be capable of cooling operation down to 23°F (-5°C) ambient temperature without additional low ambient controls (an optional wind baffle shall be required for cooling operation down to 0°F (-17.7°C). 4. The outdoor unit shall be able to operate with a maximum height difference of 100 feet (30 meters) between the indoor and outdoor units. 5. System shall be capable of operation up to a maximum refrigerant tubing length of 100 feet (30 meters) for the 1 and 1. ton units and 165 feet (50 meters) for the 2 thru 3. ton units between indoor and outdoor units without the need for line size changes, traps or additional oil. B. Unit Cabinet: 1. The casing shall be fabricated of galvanized steel finished with an electrostatically applied, thermally fused acrylic or polyester powder coating for corrosion protection. 2. Serviceable parts shall be accessible by means of removable panel sections. 3. Cabinet color shall be the manufacturer’s standard color. 4. The unit shall have two (2) mild steel mounting feet, transversely mounted and welded to the cabinet base pan. The mounting feet shall have a slotted mounting hole at each end for a total of four (4) mounting holes. The cabinet assembly shall be sufficient to withstand 155 MPH wind speed conditions for use in Hurricane condition areas. C. Fan: 1. The unit shall be furnished with single or dual direct drive fan wheels. 2. The fan motor shall be a direct current (DC) motor with permanently lubricated bearings. 3. The fan motor shall be mounted for quiet operation. 4. The unit shall be provided with a raised fan safety guard to prevent contact with moving parts. 5. The outdoor unit shall have horizontal discharge airflow. D. Coil: 1. The L shaped condenser coil shall be constructed of copper tubing with flat aluminum fins to reduce debris build up and allow maximum airflow. The coil shall be protected with an integral metal guard. 2. Refrigerant flow from the outdoor unit shall be regulated by means of an electronic linear expansion valve (LEV) metering device. 3. The outdoor unit shall be pre-charged with sufficient R-410a refrigerant to accommodate up to twenty-five (25) feet of refrigerant piping for capacities up to 18,000 btu/hr., and up to thirty-three (33) feet of refrigerant piping for capacities above 18,000 btu/hr. 4. Refrigerant linesets between the outdoor and indoor units shall be annealed refrigeration grade copper tubing, Type ACR, meeting ASTM B280 requirements. The lines shall be individually insulated in twin-tube, flexible, closed-cell, CFC-free (ozone depletion potential of zero), elastomeric material for the insulation of refrigerant pipes and tubes with a thermal conductivity equal to or better than 0.27 BTU-inch/hour per ft2/°F and a water vapor transmission equal to or better than 0.08 Perm-inch. Insulation thickness shall be as required to satisfy project specific energy code requirements (refer to Section 23 23 00 Refrigerant Piping for additional information). Insulation shall have a Flame-Spread Index of less than 25 and a Smoke-development Index of less than 50 as tested by ASTM E 84 and CAN/ULC S-102. 5. Refrigerant piping connections between the outdoor and indoor units shall be flare type. E. Compressor: 1. The compressor shall be the high performance, hermetic, inverter driven, variable speed, dual rotary type. 2. The compressor motor shall be the direct current (DC) type equipped with a factory installed inverter drive package. 3. The outdoor unit shall be equipped with an accumulator and high pressure safety switch. 4. The compressor shall be equipped with internal thermal overload protection. 5. To prevent liquid from accumulating in the compressor during the off cycle, a minimal amount of current shall be automatically, intermittently applied to the compressor motor windings to maintain sufficient heat to vaporize any refrigerant.  No crankcase heater will be required. 6. There shall be no need for line size changes. Filters, sight glasses, and traps shall not be used, and no additional refrigerant oil shall be required. 7. The compressor shall be resiliently mounted to reduce vibration transmission. F. Electrical 1. The unit electrical characteristics shall be 208/230 volts, 1-phase, 60 hertz and shall be capable of satisfactory operation within voltage limits of 187 volts to 253 volts. 2. The outdoor unit shall be controlled by the microprocessor located in the indoor unit. The control signal between the indoor unit and the outdoor unit shall be pulse signal 24 volts DC. The unit shall have a Pulse Amplitude Modulation circuit to utilize 98% of the input power supply. 2.03 CONTROLS A. General: 1. The system shall have either a wired remote controller as scheduled to perform input functions necessary to operate the system. 2. The controllers shall have a Power On/Off switch, Mode Selector – Auto, Cool, Dry Modes -Temperature Setting, Timer Control with Clock, Fan Speed Select and Vane / Airflow Direction selector. Controllers shall have a programmable Smart Set button for pre-selected Temperature, Fan Speed, and Vane position settings. 3. The controller shall support multiple languages (Spanish, German, Japanese, Chinese, English, Russian, Italian, or French) for display information. 4. The indoor unit shall be capable of performing self-diagnostic functions and check mode switching. 5. Temperature changes shall be displayed in 1ºF (1ºC) increments with a range of 61 -88ºF (16-31ºC). 6. The microprocessor located in the indoor unit shall have the capability of sensing return air temperature and indoor coil temperature, receiving and processing commands from the wireless or a wired controller, providing emergency operation and controlling the outdoor unit. 7. The system shall be capable of automatically restarting and operating at the previously selected conditions when the power is restored after power interruption. 8. Control system shall control the continued operation of the air sweep louvers, as well as provide On/Off, System/Mode function. 9. Controller options: a. Wired wall mounted remote controller: The wired remote controller shall be furnished with a communications interface to communicate with the indoor unit. The interface will be mounted at the indoor unit. The wired remote controller shall have a light-green LCD display. There shall be a built-in weekly timer with up to 8 pattern settings per day. The controller shall consist of an On/Off button, Increase/Decrease Set Temperature buttons, a Cool/Auto/Fan/Dry mode selector, a Timer Menu button, a Timer On/Off button, Set Time buttons, a Fan Speed selector, a Ventilation button, a Test Run button, and a Check Mode button. The controller shall have a built-in temperature sensor. 2.04 ACCESSORIES A. Wind Guard/Baffle: if specified or if required to achieve proper operation due to high wind conditions and/or low ambient operation. B. Wall mounting bracket (if specified): factory fabricated painted steel bracket to accept outdoor unit mounting holes, secure to wall and provide manufacturer recommended airflow and maintenance clearances. C. Air outlet guide: provide where multiple units are arranged for series airflow at less than manufacturer’s recommended airflow clearance. D. Outdoor drain pan with drain connection: provide where outdoor units are subject to defrost and located in an area where melting ice could pose a nuisance/safety issue. Extend drain piping to a safe area. E. Condensate pump: provide where condensate drain piping cannot be installed to achieve gravity flow. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.01 GENERAL A. Units shall be installed as indicated and in strict accordance with manufacturer’s recommendations and installation instructions. B. Units shall be installed level. C. Test for positive condensate drainage. D. Units shall be installed to allow adequate service to all components. E. Review the Installation, Operation, and Maintenance Manual with the Owner’s representative. END OF SECTION 23 8128.12 SECTION 23 8128.13 -DUCTLESS SPLIT SYSTEM HEAT PUMPS (1 to 3. TONS) PART 1 -GENERAL 1.01 DESCRIPTION A. All work specified herein shall be accomplished in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section 23 00 00 -HVAC General. B. Furnish and install direct expansion air-to-air split system heat pump units of the size and capacity shown on the equipment schedule. The unit shall be completely factory assembled and tested, and shall include variable speed compressor, indoor and outdoor coils, fan motors, wireless or wired remote controller, interconnecting refrigerant tubing, and power and control wiring. The outdoor unit shall be of the inverter driven design and factory matched with the indoor unit. C. Equipment schedules and specifications are intended to establish a minimum level of quality and workmanship for the project. When other than the basis of design equipment is proposed, the Contractor shall be responsible for all costs associated with engineering and construction modifications necessary in his or any other trade that may be required to satisfy the Contract Documents. D. Refer to the drawings for basis of design manufacturer and acceptable alternates. 1.02 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. For piping, valves, accessories and piping insulation refer to Section 23 23 00 – Refrigerant Piping. 1.03 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. The units shall be tested by a Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory (NRTL) and shall bear the ETL label. B. All wiring shall be in accordance with the National Electrical Code (NEC). C. The units shall be rated in accordance with Air-conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Institute’s (AHRI) Standard 210/240 and bear the AHRI Certification label. D. The units shall be manufactured in a facility registered to ISO 9001 and ISO 14001. E. A dry air holding charge shall be provided in the indoor section. F. System efficiency shall meet or exceed the scheduled values. G. Delivery, Storage and Handling: 1. Equipment shall be stored and handled according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. 2. The controller shall be able to withstand storage temperature of 105°F and 95% relative humidity without any adverse effects. 1.04 SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: Include performance data (including extended capacity ratings if other than AHRI standard conditions are scheduled); installation, operation and maintenance manual; operating characteristics; furnished specialties; and accessories. B. Submit AHRI Certificates. 1.05 COORDINATION A. Coordinate size, weight and location with Architectural and Structural drawings. Where concrete pads are indicated, conform to Division 03 for concrete, reinforcement, and formwork requirements. 1.06 WARRANTY A. The indoor and outdoor units shall carry a manufacturer’s standard parts and defects warranty for a period five (5) years from the date of installation. The compressor shall carry a warranty of seven (7) years from the same date of installation. If, during this period, any part should fail to function properly due to defects in workmanship or material, it shall be replaced or repaired at the discretion of the manufacturer.  PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.01 INDOOR UNITS A. The indoor units shall be following types: wall mount, ceiling recessed cassette, ceiling suspended and horizontal ducted. All indoor units shall be factory assembled, wired and run tested. Contained within the unit shall be all factory wiring, piping, control circuit board, DUCTLESS SPLIT SYSTEM HEAT PUMPS (1 to 3. TONS) 23 8128.13 -1 fan and fan motor. The unit shall have a self-diagnostic function, 3-minute time delay mechanism, and an auto restart function after power interruption. Indoor unit shall be purged with dry air before shipment from factory. B. Wall Mount Type: 1. Unit Cabinet: a. The cabinet shall be formed from high strength molded plastic with smooth finish, flat front panel design with access for filter. Cabinet color shall be white. b. A separate metal installation plate that secures the indoor unit firmly to the wall shall be furnished with the unit. The installation plate shall be securely attached to the wall using an appropriate anchoring method for the wall type the unit will be attached to. 2. Fan: a. The fan shall be a high performance direct drive double inlet forward curved sirocco type design driven by a single motor. The fan shall be statically and dynamically balanced and be powered by a motor with permanently lubricated bearings. b. The fan shall have three (3) speeds: Low, Mid, High and Auto. The fan shall have a selectable Auto fan setting that will adjust the fan speed based on the difference between controller set-point and space temperature. 3. Directional Air Flow Vane: An integral, motorized multi-position vane shall automatically direct air flow in a horizontal and downward direction to provide uniform air distribution. 4. Filter: Return air shall be filtered by means of an easily removable washable filter. 5. Coil: a. The indoor unit coil shall be of nonferrous construction with pre-coated aluminum strake fins on copper tubing. The multi-angled heat exchanger shall have a modified fin shape that reduces air resistance for a smoother, quieter airflow.  b. All tube joints shall be brazed with PhosCopper or silver alloy. c. The coils shall be pressure tested at the factory.  d. A condensate pan and drain shall be provided under the coil. e. A condensate mini-pump shall be provided when scheduled to provide a means of condensate disposal when a gravity drain is not available. C. Ceiling Recessed Cassette Type: 1. Unit Cabinet: a. The cabinet shall be formed from galvanized sheet metal coated with high-density foam insulation. The cabinet shall be designed for recessed mounting and provided with four (4) corner mounting supports behind removable corner pockets located in the grille assembly allowing adjustment of mounting height from the front of the unit. b. The cabinet panel shall have provisions for a field installed filtered outside air intake. c. The cabinet shall have a knock-out for the connection of a branch supply air duct to condition a secondary space. d. The cabinet shall have an optional multi-function casement which will mount between the unit cabinet and the Grille assembly to provide a second field installed filtered outside air intake and provide a mount for a high-efficiency filter element. e. A separate grille assembly shall be attached to the front of the cabinet with supply air vanes to supply air in four directions. The four-way grill shall allow two, three or four-way blow. The grille vane angles shall be individually adjustable from the wired remote controller. The return air intake shall be located in the center section of the grille. The grille assembly shall be white. 2. Fan: DUCTLESS SPLIT SYSTEM HEAT PUMPS (1 to 3. TONS) 23 8128.13 -2 a. The fan shall be a direct drive turbo propeller design driven by a single motor. The fan shall be statically and dynamically balanced and be powered by a motor with permanently lubricated bearings. b. The fan shall have four (4) speeds: Low, Mid1, Mid2, High and Auto. The fan shall have a selectable Auto fan setting that will adjust the fan speed based on the difference between controller set-point and space temperature. 3. Directional Air Flow Vane: An integral, motorized multi-position vane shall automatically direct air flow in a horizontal and downward direction to provide uniform air distribution. 4. Filter: a. Return air shall be filtered by means of an easily removable washable filter. 5. Coil: a. The indoor unit coil shall be of nonferrous construction with pre-coated aluminum strake fins on copper tubing. The heat exchanger shall have a modified fin shape that reduces air resistance for a smoother, quieter airflow.  b. All tube joints shall be brazed with PhosCopper or silver alloy. c. The coils shall be pressure tested at the factory.  d. A condensate pan and drain shall be provided under the coil. e. A condensate mini-pump shall be provided when scheduled to provide a means of condensate disposal when a gravity drain is not available. D. Ceiling Suspended Type: 1. Unit Cabinet: a. The cabinet shall be formed from high strength molded plastic. Cabinet color shall be white. b. The cabinet shall be designed for overhead suspension mounting and horizontal operation. c. The unit shall have removable mounting brackets. A mounting template with suspension bolt locations shall be furnished with the unit. Mounting bolts or threaded rod of 3/8" diameter shall be used to suspend the unit and the unit shall not require direct contact with the ceiling for proper operation. d. The rear cabinet panel shall have knock-out provisions for a field installed filtered 4-5/16" diameter ventilation air intake connection. 2. Fan: a. The fan assembly shall have multiple high performance direct drive double inlet forward curved sirocco type wheels driven by a single motor. The fan shall be statically and dynamically balanced and be powered by a motor with permanently lubricated bearings. b. The fan shall have four (4) speeds: Low, Mid1, Mid2, High and Auto. The fan shall have a selectable Auto fan setting that will adjust the fan speed based on the difference between controller set-point and space temperature. 3. Directional Air Flow Vane: An integral, motorized multi-position vane shall automatically direct air flow in a horizontal and downward direction to provide uniform air distribution. 4. Filter: a. Return air shall be filtered by means of an easily removable washable filter. b. An optional MERV 8 filter shall be provided. 5. Coil: a. The indoor unit coil shall be of nonferrous construction with pre-coated aluminum strake fins on copper tubing. The multi-angled heat exchanger DUCTLESS SPLIT SYSTEM HEAT PUMPS (1 to 3. TONS) 23 8128.13 -3 shall have a modified fin shape that reduces air resistance for a smoother, quieter airflow.  b. All tube joints shall be brazed with PhosCopper or silver alloy. c. The coils shall be pressure tested at the factory.  d. A condensate pan and drain shall be provided under the coil. e. An optional drain lift mechanism, capable of lifting condensate 23-5/8" above the drain pan shall be provided. 6. Electrical: a. The unit electrical characteristics shall be 208/230 volts, 1-phase, 60 hertz. b. The indoor unit will be powered directly from the outdoor unit. c. The indoor unit shall not have any supplemental electric heat. E. Horizontal Ducted Type: 1. Unit Cabinet: a. The cabinet shall be the space saving, low profile, horizontal, ducted type. Formed cabinet shall be constructed of G-60 galvanized steel with factory applied foam surface insulation to prevent condensation on the outer surfaces. The cabinet shall be designed for overhead suspension mounting and horizontal operation. b. The cabinet shall be provided with four mounting brackets to accommodate suspension from threaded rod or structural supports located on the side panels at all four corners. Brackets shall be suitable for supporting the weight of the indoor unit. The cabinet shall be equipped with a ducted air outlet and ducted rear return air connection. c. The rear cabinet panel shall have knock-out provisions for a field installed filtered 3-5/16" diameter ventilation air intake connection. 2. Fan: a. The fan assembly shall have multiple high performance direct drive double inlet forward curved sirocco type wheels driven by a single motor. The fan shall be statically and dynamically balanced and be powered by a motor with permanently lubricated bearings. b. The fan shall have three (3) speeds: Low, Mid, High and Auto. The fan shall have a selectable Auto fan setting that will adjust the fan speed based on the difference between controller set-point and space temperature. 3. Filter: a. Return air shall be filtered by means of a standard factory installed return air filter. b. An optional filter rack assembly with replaceable 2" thick MERV 10 pleated filters, filter access panels, and mounting connections for connection to the indoor unit shall be provided. 4. Coil: a. The indoor unit coil shall be of nonferrous construction with smooth plate fins on copper tubing. The multi-angled heat exchanger shall have a modified fin shape that reduces air resistance for a smoother, quieter airflow.  b. All tube joints shall be brazed with PhosCopper or silver alloy. c. The coils shall be pressure tested at the factory.  d. A condensate pan and drain shall be provided under the coil. e. In addition to the gravity drain, the unit shall be provided with an integral condensate lift mechanism able to raise the condensate above the pan. The lift mechanism shall incorporate a safety sensor system to shut down the indoor fan and the outdoor unit in the event a high level of condensate is detected in the drain pan. f. Condensate overflow protection: a drain pan water level switch, designed to connect to the control board and shut the unit off, shall be provided when scheduled. DUCTLESS SPLIT SYSTEM HEAT PUMPS (1 to 3. TONS) 23 8128.13 -4 5. Electrical: a. The unit electrical characteristics shall be 208/230 volts, 1-phase, 60 hertz. b. The indoor unit will be powered directly from the outdoor unit. c. The indoor unit shall not have any supplemental electric heat. 2.02 OUTDOOR UNIT A. General: 1. The outdoor unit shall be specifically designed and matched to operate with the indoor unit. The outdoor unit shall be completely factory assembled, piped and wired and run tested at the factory. 2. The outdoor unit shall be equipped with an electronic control board that interfaces with the indoor unit to perform all necessary operation functions.  3. The unit shall be capable of cooling operation down to 23°F (-5°C) ambient temperature without additional low ambient controls (an optional wind baffle shall be required for cooling operation down to 0°F (-17.7°C). Heating shall be available between 17°F (-8°C) and 70°F (21°C) ambient without any additional controls or accessories. 4. The outdoor unit shall be able to operate with a maximum height difference of 100 feet (30 meters) between the indoor and outdoor units. 5. System shall be capable of operation up to a maximum refrigerant tubing length of 100 feet (30 meters) for the 1 and 1. ton units and 165 feet (50 meters) for the 2 thru 3. ton units between indoor and outdoor units without the need for line size changes, traps or additional oil. B. Unit Cabinet: 1. The casing shall be fabricated of galvanized steel finished with an electrostatically applied, thermally fused acrylic or polyester powder coating for corrosion protection. 2. Serviceable parts shall be accessible by means of removable panel sections. 3. Cabinet color shall be the manufacturer’s standard color. 4. The unit shall have two (2) mild steel mounting feet, transversely mounted and welded to the cabinet base pan. The mounting feet shall have a slotted mounting hole at each end for a total of four (4) mounting holes. The cabinet assembly shall be sufficient to withstand 155 MPH wind speed conditions for use in Hurricane condition areas. C. Fan: 1. The unit shall be furnished with single or dual direct drive fan wheels. 2. The fan motor shall be a direct current (DC) motor with permanently lubricated bearings. 3. The fan motor shall be mounted for quiet operation. 4. The unit shall be provided with a raised fan safety guard to prevent contact with moving parts. 5. The outdoor unit shall have horizontal discharge airflow. D. Coil: 1. The L shaped condenser coil shall be constructed of copper tubing with flat aluminum fins to reduce debris build up and allow maximum airflow. The coil shall be protected with an integral metal guard. 2. Refrigerant flow from the outdoor unit shall be regulated by means of an electronic linear expansion valve (LEV) metering device. 3. The outdoor unit shall be pre-charged with sufficient R-410a refrigerant to accommodate up to twenty-five (25) feet of refrigerant piping for capacities up to 18,000 btu/hr., and up to thirty-three (33) feet of refrigerant piping for capacities above 18,000 btu/hr. 4. Refrigerant linesets between the outdoor and indoor units shall be annealed refrigeration grade copper tubing, Type ACR, meeting ASTM B280 requirements. The lines shall be individually insulated in twin-tube, flexible, closed-cell, CFC-free (ozone depletion potential of zero), elastomeric material for the insulation of refrigerant pipes and tubes with a thermal conductivity equal to or better than 0.27 DUCTLESS SPLIT SYSTEM HEAT PUMPS (1 to 3. TONS) 23 8128.13 -5 BTU-inch/hour per ft2/°F and a water vapor transmission equal to or better than 0.08 Perm-inch. Insulation thickness shall be as required to satisfy project specific energy code requirements (refer to Section 23 23 00 Refrigerant Piping for additional information). Insulation shall have a Flame-Spread Index of less than 25 and a Smoke-development Index of less than 50 as tested by ASTM E 84 and CAN/ULC S-102. 5. Refrigerant piping connections between the outdoor and indoor units shall be flare type. E. Compressor: 1. The compressor shall be the high performance, hermetic, inverter driven, variable speed, dual rotary type. 2. The compressor motor shall be the direct current (DC) type equipped with a factory installed inverter drive package. 3. The outdoor unit shall be equipped with an accumulator and high pressure safety switch. 4. The compressor shall be equipped with internal thermal overload protection. 5. To prevent liquid from accumulating in the compressor during the off cycle, a minimal amount of current shall be automatically, intermittently applied to the compressor motor windings to maintain sufficient heat to vaporize any refrigerant.  No crankcase heater will be required. 6. There shall be no need for line size changes. Filters, sight glasses, and traps shall not be used, and no additional refrigerant oil shall be required. 7. The compressor shall be resiliently mounted to reduce vibration transmission. F. Electrical: 1. The unit electrical characteristics shall be 208/230 volts, 1-phase, 60 hertz and shall be capable of satisfactory operation within voltage limits of 187 volts to 253 volts. 2. The outdoor unit shall be controlled by the microprocessor located in the indoor unit. The control signal between the indoor unit and the outdoor unit shall be pulse signal 24 volts DC. The unit shall have a Pulse Amplitude Modulation circuit to utilize 98% of the input power supply. 2.03 CONTROLS A. General: 1. The system shall have either a wired remote controller as scheduled to perform input functions necessary to operate the system. 2. The controllers shall have a Power On/Off switch, Mode Selector – Auto, Cool, Heat, Dry Modes -Temperature Setting, Timer Control with Clock, Fan Speed Select and Vane / Airflow Direction selector. Controllers shall have a programmable Smart Set button for pre-selected Temperature, Fan Speed, and Vane position settings. 3. The controller shall support multiple languages (Spanish, German, Japanese, Chinese, English, Russian, Italian, or French) for display information. 4. The indoor unit shall be capable of performing self-diagnostic functions and check mode switching. 5. Temperature changes shall be displayed in 1ºF (1ºC) increments with a range of 61 -88ºF (16-31ºC). 6. The microprocessor located in the indoor unit shall have the capability of sensing return air temperature and indoor coil temperature, receiving and processing commands from the wireless or a wired controller, providing emergency operation and controlling the outdoor unit. 7. The system shall be capable of automatically restarting and operating at the previously selected conditions when the power is restored after power interruption. 8. Control system shall control the continued operation of the air sweep louvers, as well as provide On/Off, System/Mode function. 9. Controller options: DUCTLESS SPLIT SYSTEM HEAT PUMPS (1 to 3. TONS) 23 8128.13 -6 a. Wired wall mounted remote controller: The wired remote controller shall be furnished with a communications interface to communicate with the indoor unit. The interface will be mounted at the indoor unit. The wired remote controller shall have a light-green LCD display. There shall be a built-in weekly timer with up to 8 pattern settings per day. The controller shall consist of an On/Off button, Increase/Decrease Set Temperature buttons, a Cool/Auto/Fan/Dry mode selector, a Timer Menu button, a Timer On/Off button, Set Time buttons, a Fan Speed selector, a Ventilation button, a Test Run button, and a Check Mode button. The controller shall have a built-in temperature sensor. 2.04 ACCESSORIES A. Wind Guard/Baffle: if specified or if required to achieve proper operation due to high wind conditions and/or low ambient operation. B. Wall mounting bracket (if specified): factory fabricated painted steel bracket to accept outdoor unit mounting holes, secure to wall and provide manufacturer recommended airflow and maintenance clearances. C. Air outlet guide: provide where multiple units are arranged for series airflow at less than manufacturer’s recommended airflow clearance. D. Outdoor drain pan with drain connection: provide where outdoor units are subject to defrost and located in an area where melting ice could pose a nuisance/safety issue. Extend drain piping to a safe area. E. Condensate pump: provide where condensate drain piping cannot be installed to achieve gravity flow. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.01 GENERAL A. Units shall be installed as indicated and in strict accordance with manufacturer’s recommendations and installation instructions. B. Units shall be installed level. C. Test for positive condensate drainage. D. Units shall be installed to allow adequate service to all components. E. Review the Installation, Operation, and Maintenance Manual with the Owner’s representative. END OF SECTION DUCTLESS SPLIT SYSTEM HEAT PUMPS (1 to 3. TONS) 23 8128.13 -7 SECTION 23 8129 -VARIABLE REFRIGERANT FLOW HVAC SYSTEMS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.01 DESCRIPTION A. All work specified in this section is subject to the provisions of Section 23 00 00 -HVAC General. B. This specification stipulates the requirements for the design, fabrication, and performance of air-cooled Variable Refrigerant Flow HVAC Systems. C. Furnish and install factory assembled components of the Variable Refrigerant Flow HVAC System(s) of the type and operational characteristics shown and as specified herein. All systems and controls shall be by the same manufacturer. D. Equipment schedules and specifications are intended to establish a minimum level of quality and workmanship for the project. When other than the basis of design equipment is proposed, the Contractor shall be responsible for all costs associated with engineering and construction modifications necessary in his or any other trade that may be required to satisfy the Contract Documents. E. The VRF system shall be installed by a licensed mechanical contractor trained by the VRF equipment manufacturer or certified manufacturer’s agent. Refer to Section 1.03 Quality Assurance, Section 1.10 Specification Compliance Review, and Section 1.11 Submittals for requirements. F. Commissioning shall be performed by the manufacturer or certified manufacturer’s agent. The test and balance agency and commissioning agent shall be engaged for all aspects of the commissioning process. G. The Variable Refrigerant Flow HVAC Systems shall be provided to meet the minimum capacities scheduled at the indicated design conditions, shall meet all constraints of construction, and shall comply with all specification sections. H. System descriptions of Variable Refrigerant Flow (VRF) and Variable Refrigerant Volume (VRV) may be used interchangeably and refer to the same type of system. I. System component descriptions of Refrigerant Control Module (RCM), Branch Selector (BS); Mode Control Unit (MCU), Heat Recovery Unit (HRU), Flow Selector (FS), Multiport Distribution Controller (MDC), and Branch Controller (BC/MCU) may be used interchangeably within this specification. These component descriptions refer to the equipment used to allow simultaneous heating and cooling by directing the hot gas refrigerant or subcooled liquid refrigerant to flow to the indoor units. 1.02 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. For piping, valves, accessories, and piping insulation refer to Section 23 23 00 –Refrigerant Piping, Insulation and Accessories. 1.03 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. The units shall be tested by a Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory (NRTL), in accordance with ANSI/UL 1995 – Heating and Cooling Equipment and bear the Listed Mark. B. All wiring shall be in accordance with the National Electrical Code (NEC). C. Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70 (NEC), Article 100, by a testing agency acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction and marked for their intended use. D. Fabricate and label refrigeration system to comply with ASHRAE 15 -Safety Standard for Refrigeration Systems. See Submittal paragraph below for Refrigerant Concentration Limit calculations. E. Energy Efficiency Ratio (EER) and/or Seasonal Energy Efficiency Ratio (SEER): Equal to or greater than prescribed by ASHRAE/IESNA 90.1-Energy Standard for Buildings Except Low-Rise Residential Buildings. F. Coefficient of Performance (COP) and/or Heating Seasonal Performance Factor (HSPF): Equal to or greater than prescribed by ASHRAE/IESNA 90.1 -Energy Standard for Buildings Except Low-Rise Residential Buildings. Jordan & Skala Engineers 23 8129 -1VARIABLE REFRIGERANT FLOW HVAC SYSTEMS G. The units shall be manufactured in a facility registered to ISO 9001 and ISO 14001 which is a set of standards applying to environmental protection set by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). The system(s) shall be factory tested for safety and function. H. System(s) shall be rated and certified in accordance with AHRI Standard 1230 with Addendum 2 and meet minimum efficiencies scheduled. I. Manufacturer shall have been engaged in the production of this type of equipment for a minimum of ten (10) years. J. The manufacturer's representative local to the project site shall provide proof of continuous sales and support of VRF products for at least ten (10) years. K. Manufacturer shall have parts, equipment and materials stocked within the U.S. for immediate order. L. Manufacturer shall have factory certified service technicians available and within 50 miles of the project site. M. Installer Qualifications: A firm or individual experienced in installing, erecting, or assembling work similar in material, design, and extent to that indicated for this Project, whose work has resulted in construction with a record of successful in-service performance. 1. On-site installation personnel shall be trained and certified by a manufacturer’s authorized representative. The installing contractor and installation personnel shall be experienced and have completed a minimum of five (5) previous projects similar in nature, size, and scope of this project. Submit training certificates and a project experience list with system description and contact information for the owner/operator. The mechanical contractor’s installation price shall be based on the system’s installation requirements. The mechanical contractor bids with complete knowledge of the HVAC system requirements. 2. The manufacturer's representative local to the project site shall provide proof of ongoing installation training at their local facility for at least five (5) years. N. The condensing unit(s) shall be factory charged with R-410A. 1.04 ACCEPTABLE MANUFACTURERS A. Refer to the drawings for basis of design manufacturer. Alternate manufacturers listed below may be considered for approval so long as the equipment meets or exceeds all the requirements of these Contract Documents. 1. Daikin 2. LG 3. Samsung 4. Carrier 5. Toshiba/Carrier 6. Trane/Mitsubishi B. The proposed alternate systems shall meet or exceed the energy ratings as listed in AHRI 1230. C. When a substitution of equipment is made, the Contractor shall be responsible for all costs associated with engineering and construction modifications necessary in his or any other trade that may be required to satisfy the Contract Documents. 1.05 SYSTEM DESCRIPTION A. The VRF system shall be a heat recovery system with the capability of providing simultaneous cooling and heating to multiple zones or a heat pump system as scheduled. 1. The heat recovery system shall consist of one, two, or three (max.) outdoor heat pump units, branch selectors/heat recovery units (designed for minimum piping and maximum design flexibility), a two-or three-pipe refrigerant distribution system, multiple indoor units, and controls by the equipment manufacturer. a. The outdoor units shall be air-cooled direct expansion (DX) type with variable speed inverter driven compressors. The system shall have the Jordan & Skala Engineers 23 8129 -2VARIABLE REFRIGERANT FLOW HVAC SYSTEMS capability to connect an indoor evaporator nominal capacity of no less than 130% of the outdoor unit’s nominal total capacity. b. Every indoor unit or zone shall be independently capable of operating in either heating or cooling mode regardless of the mode of other indoor units. c. The system shall be capable of changing mode of individual indoor units or zones (cooling to heating or heating to cooling) within a maximum time of 5 minutes to ensure the indoor temperature can be properly maintained. d. A single heat recovery system shall support the number of indoor zones indicated on the drawings. e. Operation of the system shall permit either individual cooling or heating of each indoor unit simultaneously. Each indoor unit or group of indoor units shall be able to provide set temperature independently via a local remote controller, the manufacturer’s controlpackage, or a BACnet BASinterface if the building is being provided with a BAS system. f. Refrigerant Control Modules (RCM) shall be located where shown on the drawings. The RCMs shall contain the refrigerant control piping and electronics to facilitate communications between the RCM and main processor and between the RCM and indoor units. The RCM shall control the operational mode of the subordinate indoor units. g. If required by the manufacturer, provide insulated condensate drain piping from the RCM to the nearest condensate drain. Where the basis of design manufacturer does not require a condensate drain and none is shown on the Drawings, the Contractor shall size the insulated condensate drain horizontal and vertical piping and coordinate the routing through the building. The Contractor shall coordinate an acceptable point of connection to the storm or sanitary system as permitted by Code. Condensate drain piping materials and insulation type and thickness shall conform to the requirements of Sections 23 07 00 HVAC Insulation and 23 21 13 Piping and Accessories. 2. The heat pump system shall consist of an outdoor unit, a two-pipe refrigerant distribution system, multiple indoor units, and controls by the equipment manufacturer. a. The outdoor unit shall be air-cooled direct expansion (DX) type with variable speed inverter driven compressors. The system shall have the capability to connect an indoor evaporator nominal capacity of no less than 130% of the outdoor unit’s nominal total capacity. It is permissible for the indoor evaporator nominal capacity to exceed 130% of the outdoor unit’s nominal total capacity where permitted by the manufacturer. b. The indoor units shall operate in the same heating or cooling mode as all other indoor units connected to a single outdoor unit. c. A single heat pump system shall support up to the number of indoor zones indicated on the drawings. B. The indoor units shall be connected to the outdoor unit utilizing the manufacturer specific piping joints, wye-branches, and headers to ensure correct refrigerant flow and balancing. T-style joints are not acceptable. C. Furnish and install indoor units of the type and capacity shown on the equipment schedules. Units shall be rated in accordance with AHRI Standards. 1.06 OPERATING RANGE A. Heat pump system: 1. The operating range in cooling shall be 23°F to 115°F DB or wider. Provide low ambient operation/wind baffle kit as required for proper operation. Jordan & Skala Engineers 23 8129 -3VARIABLE REFRIGERANT FLOW HVAC SYSTEMS 2. Low ambient cooling operation shall be provided down to 10°F DB ambient. Provide low ambient operation/wind baffle kit. 3. The operating range in heating shall be -4°F to 60°F WB or wider. Provide low ambient operation/wind baffle kit as required for proper operation. B. Cooling mode indoor room temperature range will be 59°F to75°F WB or wider. C. Heating mode indoor room temperature range will be 59°F to 80°F DB or wider. 1.07 ADDITIONAL REQUIRED FEATURES A. Auto charging – Each system shall have a refrigerant auto-charging function. If Autocharging is not available, the manufacturer shall furnish refrigerant charge calculations for each system prior to startup. Included with the project close-out documentation, the installing contractor shall include the actual as-built line lengths with sizes so the manufacturer can rerun the program to determine the required charge. B. Defrost and Heating Mode – Each system, except single module systems, shall maintain continuous heating during defrost operation. If a stage of defrost disables the heating for any period of time, all indoor units associated with the outdoor unit in defrost mode shall de-energize the fans for the duration of the defrost cycle. A defrost cycle shall not exceed five (5) minutes.  C. Oil Return and Heating Mode – Each system shall maintain continuous heating during oil return operation. Reverse cycle (cooling mode) oil return during heating operation shall not be permitted. D. Independent Control – Each indoor unit shall use a dedicated electronic expansion valve for independent control. E. VFD Inverter Control – Each condensing unit shall use a high efficiency, variable speed “inverter” compressor coupledwith inverterfan motors for optimized part load performance. Inverter controlled compressors shall modulate from 4% to 100%. On-off or digital compressor control is not permitted. F. Compressor capacity shall be modulated automatically to maintain constant suction and condensing pressures while varying the refrigerant volume for the needs of the cooling or heating loads. G. Indoor units shall use Proportional-Integral-Derivative (PID) control loops to control superheat to deliver a comfortable room temperature condition and optimize efficiency.  Indoor units shall control to within a +/-one (1) degree F deadband. H. Connection Ratios – The outdoor unit shall have the ability to connect an indoor unit evaporator nominal capacity of down to 50% and up to a minimum of 130% of the outdoor unit nominal capacity.  I. Control Wiring – Contractor shall provide and install manufacturer’s recommended control wire sizes and types for all systems and system components. Wiring located within a return air plenum shall be plenum rated or installed within conduit. All wiring, installation methods, and terminations shall comply with the NEC. J. Advanced Diagnostics – Systems shall include a self-diagnostic, auto-check function to detect a malfunction and display the type and location. K. Upon loss of power or communication to an indoor fan coil unit, the system shall continue to operate and send an alarm signal to the central controller. Alternatively, the system shall have the capability to continue operating while communication with the fan coil unit is missing after being manually reset. L. Each outdoor unit shall incorporate contacts for electrical demand shedding. M. Each system shall be capable of integrating with open protocol BACnet and LonWorks building automation systems. 1.08 REFRIGERANT PIPING A. The system shall be capable of refrigerant piping up to 540 actual feet or 620 equivalent feet from the outdoor unit to the furthest indoor unit, a total combined liquid line length of 3,073 feet of piping between the outdoor unit and indoor units with 295 feet maximum vertical difference without any oil traps or the equivalent. Each system shall have a Jordan & Skala Engineers 23 8129 -4VARIABLE REFRIGERANT FLOW HVAC SYSTEMS maximum of 49 feet vertical difference from the highest branch serving indoor units to the lowest branch serving indoor units and this vertical limit must be within the 295 feet vertical limit between the outdoor unit and the furthest or lowest indoor unit. Manufacturer’s factory fabricated piping joints, wye-branches, and headers shall be used to ensure proper refrigerant balance and flow to provide for optimum system capacity and performance. T-style joints are not acceptable as they negatively impact proper refrigerant balance and flow. Where there is a conflict in the Contract Documents, notify the architect/engineer in writing immediately. B. Refer to Section 23 23 00 – Refrigerant Piping, Insulation and Accessories for additional requirements. 1.09 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Deliver equipment with protective factory installed crating and covering. B. Store equipment in clean dry spaces to prevent damage and protect from weather, dirt, water, and construction debris. Provide protective covers or plastic film over openings to prevent dust and debris from entering the unit or components. Remove all protective coverings prior to final connections or start-up and recycle all recyclable waste. C. Handle equipment according to manufacturer’s written rigging and installation instructions. 1.10 SPECIFICATION COMPLIANCE REVIEW A. The Contractor shall provide a Compliance Review of the Specifications and Addenda (if applicable). The Compliance Review shall be a paragraph-by-paragraph review of the Specifications with the following information: “C”, “D” or “E” marked in the margin of the original Specifications and any subsequent Addenda. 1. “C”:  Comply with no exceptions. 2. “D”: Comply with deviations. For each and every deviation, provide a numbered footnote with reasons for the proposed deviation and how the intent of the Specification can be satisfied. 3. “E”: Exception, donot comply. For each and every exception, provide a numbered footnote with reasons for non-compliance and possible alternatives. B. Failure to submit the complete Compliance Review may be cause for rejection of bid proposal. C. Unless a deviation or exception is specifically noted in the Compliance Review, it is assumed that the Contractor is in complete compliance with the Contract Documents. Deviations or exceptions taken in cover letters, subsidiary documents, by omission or by contradiction do not release the Contractor from being in complete compliance, unless the exception or deviation has been specifically noted in the Compliance Review. The Contractor may submit the latest state-of-the-art components in lieu of specified components at no additional cost, where the latest state-of-the-art components perform better than what is specified. D. All deviations from the Contract Documents must be approved by the Architect/Engineer and Owner. E. Major exceptions to these specifications will be considered sufficient cause for rejection of the submittal. F. The manufacturer shall provide Refrigerant Concentration Limit (RCL) calculations for each system in accordance with ASHRAE Standard 15 -Safety Standard for Refrigeration Systems and ASHRAE 34 – Designation and Safety Classification of Refrigerants or a statement that the system(s) meet the exceptions noted in Standard 15. 1.11 SUBMITTALS A. Additional information shall be submitted, upon award, in a formal submittal as itemized below. Failure to provide the following information may result in the Submittal being rejected. The Vendor shall submit: 1. Product Data: Include refrigerant type and amount of charge in pounds, rated capacities of selected models, weights (shipping, installed and operating), operating characteristics and performances, furnished specialties, and Jordan & Skala Engineers 23 8129 -5VARIABLE REFRIGERANT FLOW HVAC SYSTEMS accessories. Equipment tags (that correspond to the tag used on the drawings) shall be clearly noted in the submittal. Tags shall be noted on all relevant pages of the submittal including but not limited to capacity data, cutsheets, and risers. Risers that only reference a model number will be rejected without further review. 2. Evidence of at least 5 successful installations similar in nature, size, and scope of this project. Include owner/operator contact information. 3. Training course certificates of completion for qualified installers and supervisors. The Contractor shall include these certificates with the equipment submittal. 4. Specification Compliance Review. 5. Shop Drawings: Complete set of manufacturer’s certified prints of assemblies, control panels, piping, valves, piping fittings and branches, flow diagrams, risers, sections, elevations, unit isolations, assembled unit dimensions and weights, access requirements, required clearances for maintenance and operation, and wiring diagrams. Submit hardcopies and/or electronic copies in accordance with the General Conditions for Engineer review and approval.  a. Wiring Diagrams: Detail wiring for power, signal, and control systems and differentiate between manufacturer installed and field-installed wiring. b. The submittal package shall include, but not be limited to, equipment capacities at standard AHRI and design conditions, power requirements including MCA, RLA, MSC and MOP of each device, indoor units CFM/static pressures, fan curves, installation requirements, refrigerant type, controls, weight, and physical dimensions. Nominal performance data is not acceptable. Capacities of all equipment must be derated for all factors affecting the capacity including, but not limited to, ambient temperatures, entering conditions, piping lengths, etc. Submittals that do not include derated capacities will be rejected without review. c. AHRI certificates d. Provide manufacturer’s drawings showing layout, schedules, details, piping distribution, valves, RCM locations, system risers, and controls diagrams. The drawings shall convey all requirements to successfully install the equipment supplier’s system and show no less information than the bid documents. e. Documentation that the Contractor has coordinated the pipe routing with the Manufacturer and that the Manufacturer has approved the pipe routing and line set lengths. f. Refrigerant piping materials as outlined in Section 23 23 00 – Refrigerant Piping, Insulation and Accessories. 6. Tablet for controlling the Multi-Zone Controller (MZC) if touchscreen is not integral to the MZC. 7. Sample startup service reports. 8. Restart sequence: Provide a description of the sequence for automatic restarting of the equipment after power is restored following a power interruption. 9. Operation and Maintenance Data: a. Furnish an electronic submittal in Portable Document Format (PDF) of written operating, maintenance, controls, and lubrication instructions for all installed systems and equipment. Instructions shall include copies of all designated approved shop drawings, manufacturer’s descriptive data, control diagrams, wiring diagrams, and installation and operating instructions as specified. 10. Refrigerant Concentration Limit (RCL) calculations for each system 11. Manufacturer’s representative/vendor field inspection reports for piping system installation. Submit these within 2 weeks of each field inspection. 12. Prior to Substantial Completion, submit startup service reports and as-built piping drawings. Jordan & Skala Engineers 23 8129 -6VARIABLE REFRIGERANT FLOW HVAC SYSTEMS 1.12 WARRANTY A. The manufacturer shall warrant to the owner that products, system components, equipment, and manufacturer provided piping and accessories will be free from defects in material or workmanship. This warranty applies for a minimum of one (1) year from the date of substantial completion, or eighteen (18) months from the date of shipment. If the manufacturer’s warranty begins on the date of start-up, the Contractor shall provide the balance of the warranty to meet the aforementioned periods. The Contractor shall be responsible for completing all warranty documentation prior to acceptance of the installed systems. Repaired or replacement parts are warranted for the balance of the warranty period applicable to the original part. 1.13 EXTENDED WARRANTY A. For system components and compressor parts only, the manufacturer shall provide an extended warranty for a total of a five (5) year period. The effective date of this extended warranty shall be established as the date of startup. An installing contractor must provide the following items to the manufacturer to qualify for the extended warranty. Doing so will ensure that the contractor has installed the system according to the manufacturer recommendations. Failure to provide these items to the manufacturer shall result in the Contractor assuming responsibility for the extended warranty. 1. The manufacturer’s warranty Process/Checklist Sheet 2. Final “as built” VRF select report 3. Commissioning report from Technician Utility Tool (TUT) or the equivalent 4. Before and after digital photographs of test gauge for the pressure and vacuum tests 1.14 COORDINATION A. Coordinate with the electrical contractor to provide and install dedicated disconnect switches for each indoor unit, each RCM, and each outdoor unit. Sizes shall be per the manufacturer’s required maximum overcurrent protection sizing for each piece of equipment. The dedicated disconnects shall also be suitable for the installed location (indoor NEMA-1 or outdoor NEMA-3R). B. Coordinate with the electrical contractor to confirm all equipment voltage, phase, and nameplate data prior to ordering and prior to installation. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.01 OUTDOOR UNIT (HEAT PUMP) A. General: 1. Outdoor units shall be factory assembled and pre-wired with all necessary electronic and refrigerant controls. The refrigeration circuit of the unit shall consist of rotary or scroll compressor(s), motors, fans, condenser coil, electronic expansion valves, solenoid valves, 4-way valve, purge motor valves, distribution headers, capillaries, filters, shut off valves, oil separators, service ports and refrigerant regulator. Dual and triple frame outdoor units will be field piped with factory designed and supplied Y-branch kits to manifold them together into a single refrigerant circuit. 2. Liquid, hot gas, cold gas (suction lines) must be individually insulated between the outdoor unit and indoor units. 3. Unit control boards shall perform all functions required to operate the VRF system effectively and efficiently and communicate from outdoor unit to heat recovery and indoor units via a TIA-485 interface. 4. The outdoor unit can be wired and piped with access from the front or bottom. 5. Each outdoor unit frame shall have a removable inspection panel to allow access to service tool connection, DIP switches, auto addressing and error codes. 6. The system will automatically restart operation after a power failure and will include non-volatile memory which will not cause any settings to be lost, thus eliminating the need for reprogramming. Jordan & Skala Engineers 23 8129 -7VARIABLE REFRIGERANT FLOW HVAC SYSTEMS 7. The outdoor unit shall be modular in design and shall allow for side-by-side installation with minimum spacing between units. 8. The following safety devices shall be included on the outdoor unit: high pressure sensor and switch, low pressure switch, control circuit fuses, crankcase heaters, fusible plug, overload relay, inverter overload protector, thermal protectors for compressor and fan motors, over current protection for the inverter and anti-recycling timers. 9. To ensure the liquid refrigerant does not flash when supplying the indoor units, the circuit shall be provided with a sub-cooling feature. 10. The outdoor unit shall have a centrifugal oil separator for each compressor and controls to ensure sufficient oil supply is maintained for the compressor. 11. Heat pump outdoor unit shall be capable of heating operation at the temperature range limits specified above without additional low ambient controls or an auxiliary heat source. 12. Heat recovery outdoor unit shall be capable of heating operation at the temperature range limits specified above without additional low ambient controls or an auxiliary heat source. 13. Oil recovery cycle shall be automatic occurring 2 hours after start of operation and then every 8 hours of operation. Each system shall maintain continuous heating during oil return operation. Reverse cycle (cooling mode) oil return during heating operation shall not be permitted due to the potential reduction in space temperature. If alternative manufacturer’s system is incapable of heating during oil return, optional electric heating coil shall be furnished. Contractor is responsible for any change to electrical requirements. 14. The system shall continue to provide heat to the indoor units while in the defrost mode. Reverse cycle defrost during heating operation shall not be permitted due to the potential reduction in space temperature. If alternative manufacturer’s system is incapable of heating during defrost, an optional electric heating coil shall be furnished.  Contractor is responsible for any change to electrical requirements. 15. Outdoor unit shall have a tested sound rating no higher than 67.2 dB(A) per outdoor unit frame tested per ISO1996. 16. Each outdoor unit shall be run tested at the factory.  B. Unit Cabinet/Frame: 1. The outdoor unit shall be completely weatherproof and corrosion resistant. The unit shall be constructed from galvanized steel panels coated with baked-on enamel paint. C. Fan: 1. The outdoor unit shall consist of one or more direct-drive propeller type fans with motors that have multiple speed operation via a DC (digitally commutating) inverter. The fan shall be factory set to deliver an external static pressure of 0.12 inches WG. A field setting switch shall allow the external static pressure to be increased to a maximum 0.32 inches WG to accommodate field applied discharge ductwork for indoor mounting of outdoor units. 2. The fan shall be a vertical discharge configuration. 3. The fan motor shall have inherent thermal protection and permanently lubricated bearings. 4. The fan motor shall be provided with a fan guard to prevent contact with moving parts. 5. The outdoor unit shall be provided with a manufacturer supplied snow/hail guard to protect the outdoor coil surfaces from hail damage and snow build-up. 6. Night setback control of the fan motor for low noise operation by way of automatically limiting the maximum speed shall be a standard feature. Operation sound level shall be selectable from at least three (3) steps as shown below. Jordan & Skala Engineers 23 8129 -8VARIABLE REFRIGERANT FLOW HVAC SYSTEMS Operation Sound (dB)  Night Mode Sound Pressure Level (dB)  Step 1 max.  55  Step 2 max.  50  Step 3 max.  45  D. Coil: 1. Coils shall be manufactured from rifled bore copper tubes mechanically bonded to aluminum louvered fins to ensure high efficiency performance. 2. The fins shall be covered with a hydrophilic film that is inherently self-cleaning with each rainfall. Manufacturers whose AHRI ratings do not reflect capacity reduction due to coatings are not acceptable. 3. The pipe plates shall be treated with powdered polyester resin for corrosion prevention. The thickness of the coating must be between 2.0 and 3.0 microns. 4. The coil shall be protected with an integral metal guard. E. Compressor: 1. The inverter rotary or scroll compressors shall be variable speed (PVM inverter) controlled which is capable of changing the speed to follow the variations in total cooling and heating load as determined by the suction gas pressure as measured in the outdoor unit. In addition, samplings of evaporator and condenser temperatures shall be made so that the high/low pressures detected are read every 20 seconds and calculated. With each reading, the compressor capacity (INV frequency or STD ON/OFF) shall be controlled to eliminate deviation from the target value. 2. The inverter driven compressor in each condensing unit shall be of highly efficient reluctance DC (digitally commutating), hermetically sealed scroll. 3. Neodymium magnets or manufacturer’s equivalent shall be adopted in the rotor construction to yield a higher torque and efficiency in the compressor instead of the normal ferrite magnet type. At complete stop of the compressor, the neodymium magnets will position the rotor into the optimum position for a low torque start. 4. The frequency of the inverter compressor shall be variable from 20 to 120Hz and modulate in 1 Hz (or smaller) increments.   5. Each non-inverter compressor shall also be of the hermetically sealed scroll type. 6. Each compressor shall be equipped with a crankcase heater, high pressure safety switch, and internal thermal overload protector. 7. Oil separators shall be standard with the equipment along with an intelligent oil management system. 8. The compressor shall be isolated to avoid vibration transmission. 9. Units sized six (6) tons and smaller shall contain a minimum of one (1) compressor. Unit sized for eight (8) tons and larger shall contain a minimum of two (2) compressors. In the event of compressor failure, the remaining compressors shall continue to operate and provide heating or cooling as required at a proportionally reduced capacity.  The microprocessor and associated controls shall be designed to specifically address this condition and initiate an alarm through the control network. 10. In the case of multiple condenser modules, conjoined operation hours of the compressors shall be balanced by means of the Duty Cycling Function, ensuring sequential starting of each module at each start/stop cycle, completion of oil return, and completion of defrost. F. Electrical: 1. A separate power connection will be required for each indoor unit. Jordan & Skala Engineers 23 8129 -9VARIABLE REFRIGERANT FLOW HVAC SYSTEMS 2. Transmission (control) wiring between the indoor and outdoor unit shall be a maximum of 3,280 feet. G. Control Wiring: Wiring shall comply with NEC Article 800 and these specifications. 1. The control voltage between the indoor, RCM controllers and outdoor units shall be per the manufacturer’s installation instructions; typically, low voltage. 2. Unless directed otherwise in the manufacturer’s installation instructions, use 16 AWG, 25pF/ft. Nom., 60.7Ω/Mft impedance, braid or foil shielded, twisted pair wire for TIA-485 daisy chain communications wiring. Splicing of communication wiring shall not be permitted. 2.02 INDOOR AIR HANDLING UNITS A. General: 1. Indoor air handling units shall be wall hung, cassette type, ducted high static, ducted low static, vertical/horizontal, ceiling suspended, low-profile, or floor mounted type as indicated. Units shall be matched to and compatible with the outdoor units and operate with refrigerant R-410A equipped with an electronic expansion valve and direct-drive DC multispeed fan motor, for installation within a conditioned space. 2. When installed in a vertical configuration the unit shall have a top discharge and a bottom return unless scheduled or noted otherwise. 3. When installed in a horizontal configuration the unit shall have a horizontal discharge and a horizontal return duct connection. 4. Units shall be equipped with a means to reduce the evaporator fan speed once the thermostat is satisfied while limiting changes in room temperature by more than +/-1°F. 5. Indoor units shall be completely factory assembled and tested.  The units shall be complete with factory wiring, piping, electronic proportional expansion valve, control circuit board, fan motor thermal protection, brazed refrigerant piping connections, self-diagnostics, auto-restart function, 3-minute fused time delay, and a test run switch. 6. Indoor unit refrigerant circuit shall be filled with a dry nitrogen gas charge from the factory. 7. Return air shall be filtered by a factory supplied removable and washable filter with anti-fungal coating. 8. Condensate shall be drained via gravity, integral condensate pump, or external condensate pump. Power for the condensate pump shall match the indoor unit voltage and shall be powered by the same power circuit. Wall mounted units shall have an external condensate pump. B. Cabinet: 1. The cabinet shall be constructed of galvanized steel with sound absorbing foil-faced insulation to reduce noise and control air leakage. 2. Installation location shall have adequate structural support, space for service access and clearance for air return and supply duct connections. C. Fan: 1. The fan shall be the manufacturer’s standard direct-drive type with a statically and dynamically balanced wheel. 2. The fan motor shall be thermally protected. D. Coil: 1. Coils shall be of the direct expansion type manufactured from rifled bore copper tubes mechanically bonded to aluminum louvered fins to ensure high efficiency performance. 2. The refrigerant connections shall be the mechanical compression type with flared ends. 3. Condensate drain connection shall be a minimum of 5/8-inch inside diameter. Jordan & Skala Engineers 23 8129 -10VARIABLE REFRIGERANT FLOW HVAC SYSTEMS 4. A thermistor shall be located on the liquid and gas lines. 5. Units shall be equipped with an electronic expansion valve. 6. Condensate overflow protection must be provided by way of an internal float switch or a float switch installed in the secondary drain outlet. The float switch shall be interlocked to shut down the unit. E. Electrical: 1. A separate power connection will be required for each indoor unit. 2. Generally, indoor units shall be powered from a 208/230 volt, 1-phase, 60Hz power source. Coordinate with the electrical drawings for additional requirements such as supplemental electric heaters, when specified. 3. Control wiring between the indoor and outdoor unit shall operate at a maximum of 3,280 feet. 4. Control wiring between the indoor unit and the wall mounted controller shall operate at a maximum distance of 1,640 feet; however, the zone temperature sensor(s) shall be located within the zone served by the associated indoor unit. F. Control: 1. The unit shall have controls provided by the manufacturer to perform input functions necessary to operate the system. 2. The unit shall be compatible with connection to a BACnet network or interfacing with connection to a BAS system through the system’s Multi-Zone Controller. 3. Individual indoor units shall be provided with a controller. The unit controller, at a minimum, shall have the follow features: a. Up to 16 indoor units controllable in one group b. Can be combined with a secondary controller for dual operation c. Backlit LCD display in English d. Temperature sensor with configurable offset e. Display of Temperature and Setpoint in 1°F or °C increments f. Two display modes: Detailed and Simple g. Dual setpoints (individual cooling and heating setpoints) with minimum setpoint differential deadband h. Setpoint range limits for Cooling and Heating i. Independent cool/heat setback setpoints (unoccupied period) j. Auto changeover mode can automatically change to cool/heat mode at setpoint +/.1° F k. Built in 7-day schedule with up to 5 actions per day with independent cool/heat or setback setpoints l. Automatic adjustment for Daylight Savings Time (DST) m. 48-hour clock/calendar backup (in case of power failure) n. Constant monitoring of the system for malfunctions with an immediate display of fault location and condition o. Prohibit buttons on remote controller p. Limit selectable operation modes q. Display can be configured to hide setpoint when unit is OFF. Display shows OFF, instead of MODE when unit is off. Fan speed display can be configured to be hidden when unit is OFF. 2.03 REFRIGERANT CONTROL MODULE (RCM) FOR VRF HEAT RECOVERY SYSTEM A. General: The RCM boxes are designed specific ally for use with the manufacturer’s VRV/VRF heat recovery system components. 1. RCMs shall be factory assembled, wired, and piped. 2. RCMs shall be run tested at the factory. 3. RCMs must be mounted indoors. 4. When simultaneously heating and cooling, the units in heating mode shall energize their subcooling electronic expansion valve (EEV) (if the system utilizes EEVs), solenoid valve, linear expansion valve, or Pulse Motor Valve (PMV). Jordan & Skala Engineers 23 8129 -11VARIABLE REFRIGERANT FLOW HVAC SYSTEMS B. Unit Components: 1. Cabinet shall be fabricated from galvanized steel plates. 2. The RCM shall consist of electronic expansion valves (EEVs)pulse motor valves, or solenoid valves that are serviceable and replaceable without opening the refrigeration system.  3. The cabinet shall contain a subcooling heat exchanger (if required for proper operation). 4. The cabinet shall have sound absorptive thermal insulation material made of flame and heat resistant foamed polyethylene. C. Condensate Removal: 1. The RCM shall be provided with condensate removal capability if required by the manufacturer. D. Electrical: 1. The unit electrical power shall be 208/230 volts, 1 phase, 60 hertz. 2. The unit shall be capable of operation within the limits of 187 volts to 253 volts. 3. The minimum circuit amps (MCA) shall be 0.1 per port and the maximum overcurrent protection amps (MOP) shall be 15. 4. The control voltage between the indoor and outdoor units shall be per the manufacturer. 2.04 BALL VALVES A. Refrigerant Isolation Ball Valves shall be provided to isolate RCMs and indoor units. Refer to 3.01.F. B. Refer to Section 23 23 00 – Refrigerant Piping, Insulation and Accessories for additional requirements. 2.05 VRV/VRF CONTROLS NETWORK A. The Controls Network is made up of local remote controllers, multi-zone controllers, advanced multi-zone controllers, and open protocol network devices that transmit information via the communication bus. The Controls Network shall also have the ability to be accessed via a networked PC or mobile device. The Controls Network supports operation monitoring, scheduling, alarm and error e-mail distribution, general user software, tenant billing, maintenance support, and integration with the Building Automation Systems (BAS) using open protocol via a BACnet interface. 2.06 INDOOR AIR HANDLING UNIT TOUCH SCREEN CONTROLLERS A. Unless indicated otherwise, each indoor unit shall be provided with the manufacturer’s standard touch screen controller. The controller shall utilize an intuitive touchscreen multi.function LCD display and shall possess the following functionality: 1. Power on/off setting 2. Intuitive touch pad 3. Integral space temperature thermistor 4. Temperature set point control 5. Fahrenheit or Centigrade 6. Mode control settings (auto/cool/dry/fan/heat) 7. Fan control settings (auto/high/medium/low) 8. Sleep function (Quite Mode) 9. Filter timer 10. Access restriction settings 11. Occupied/unoccupied (manual function) 12. Vane position control (cassette units) 13. Integrated IR receiver 2.07 MULTI-ZONE CONTROLLERS (MZC) A. The multi-zone controller or central controller shall be wall-mounted in the location indicated on the Drawings. Each controller shall be capable of operating with up to 64 connected indoor unit groups, 128 indoor units, and 10 outdoor units. Additional controllers shall be provided as necessary. Jordan & Skala Engineers 23 8129 -12VARIABLE REFRIGERANT FLOW HVAC SYSTEMS B. The MZC shall support operations superseding that of the local remote controller, system configuration, daily/weekly scheduling, monitoring of operation status, and malfunction monitoring. Error messages shall be displayed on the multi-zone controller with an error code along with the unit address. C. The controller wiring shall consist of a non-polar two-wire connection to the indoor units and outdoor units. D. The MZC shall be compatible with BACnet and shall be equipped with two RJ-45 Ethernet ports to support interconnection with a network PC via the Internet, Local Area Network (LAN), or connection with a non-networked PC after completed installation. Coordinate IP address with the Owner. E. Web access functions shall be provided so that facility staff can securely log into each MZC via the PC’s web browser to support monitoring, scheduling, error email, and general user functions. F. The MZC shall permit the connection of expansion modules or adapters to increase the number of indoor units that can be connected to the MZC. G. Display 1. The MZC shall be provided with a minimum 7" backlit touchscreen LCD display. As an alternative to the touchscreen display, a tablet may be provided. If a tablet is provided, the tablet shall be the latest generation Apple iPad, Samsung Tab S-series, or Microsoft Surface Pro. If a tablet is provided in lieu of the integral touchscreen, it shall be included in the VRF submittal package. 2. The display information shall be selectable from English, French, Italian, Korean, Dutch, Portuguese, Chinese, Japanese, German, or Spanish. 3. The display shall include an auto off feature with a timer adjustable between 1 to 60 minutes. 4. Grouping: a. The MZC shall support grouping at a minimum of two tiers. Category 1 groups may be indoor units, digital inputs, or digital outputs. Category 2 groups may consist of one or more Category 1 group or other Category 2 groups. b. Category 2 groups shall be monitored and controlled by global settings. A minimum of 650 Category 2 groups shall be supported with a minimum of 10 tiers of nesting. 5. The MZC shall display on/off, operation mode, set point, space temperature, louver position, and fan speed for each Category 1 or Category 2 group. 6. The MZC shall display the date, day of the week, and time of day with automatic adjustments for daylight savings time. 7. The MZC shall include an option for the users to select temperature display in Fahrenheit or Celsius. 8. The MZC display shall be updated every 3 seconds. 9. System status icons shall display on/off (color coded), malfunction/error (color coded), forced stop, setback, filter, maintenance, and screen lock. 10. The MZC shall display the temperature set point in one-degree increments with a range of 60°F – 90°F (16°C – 32°C). 11. The MZC shall display the setup/setback setpoint temperature in one-degree increments with a range of 40°F – 95°F (5°C – 35°C). 12. The display shall reflect room temperature in one-degree increments with a range of 58°F – 95°F (15°C – 35°C). 13. A menu shall be available to configure options and display in formation for each group. 14. Error status shall be displayed in the event of a system abnormality/error with color coded icons. Error history shall be available for viewing up to 1024 alarm/abnormality/ error events. Jordan & Skala Engineers 23 8129 -13VARIABLE REFRIGERANT FLOW HVAC SYSTEMS 15. The display shall include a floor plan with each piece of equipment located in the approximate installed location. The graphic representations of the equipment shall provide visual indicators of relevant status or set point information. Equipment shall be identified using the tags as shown on the Drawings. Where the MZC lacks the ability to import a floor plan representation of the building, a separate system shall be provided to provide a graphical user interface to meet this requirement. H. MZC Functions 1. MZC shall store all settings in non-volatile memory. 2. Clock functions shall have a battery backup capable of providing power for the clock for at least 1 year without AC power. 3. Programming: a. The MZC shall support weekly schedule settings with 7 individual days. b. The schedule shall have the capability of being enabled or disabled. c. Up to 100 independent schedules shall be configurable with a minimum of 5 events for each day’s schedule. Each scheduled event shall specify the time and Category group. d. The MZC shall allow up to 40 exception days to be scheduled on the yearly schedule. e. The MZC shall support auto-changeover. Auto-change shall provide fixed, operating, and averaging changeover methods for the Category group. 1) Fixed Method: The room temperature and setpoint for a representative fan coil unit shall be used to determine when the Category group changes operating mode, even if the representative fan coil unit is not operating. 2) Operating Method: The room temperature and setpoint for a representative operating fan coil unit shall be used to determine when the Category group changes operating mode. If none of the fan coil units in the Category group is operating, the Fixed Method shall be used. 3) Average Method: The average of all the room temperatures and setpoints for all of the fan coil units in the Category group shall be used to determine when the Category group changes operating mode. 4) Changeover from heating to cooling shall occur when the room temperature is greater than or equal to the heating setpoint. 5) Changeover from cooling to heating shall occur when the room temperature is less than or equal to the cooling setpoint. 6) Automatic changeover shall be disabled for 30 minutes after a changeover event unless manually changed via the MZC or a time schedule. f. Third Party Equipment Integration 1) The MZC shall support the integration of third-party equipment such as sump pumps, rooftop units, dampers, etc. The MZC shall support assigning third party equipment to Category groups. 2) The MZC shall provide on/off based monitoring and control of third-party equipment via a schedule or manual override. 3) The MZC shall monitor the alarm/error status of third-party equipment and be capable of generating an alarm notification. g. The MZC shall support forced shutdown of the associated fan coil unit groups. 4. Web/Email Function a. The MZC shall be capable of monitoring, operating, and scheduling the Category groups via a networked PC’s web browser. The MZC shall be capable of creating user accounts, assigning access settings to users, and Jordan & Skala Engineers 23 8129 -14VARIABLE REFRIGERANT FLOW HVAC SYSTEMS sending detailed error messages via email to customized distribution lists of up to 10 email addresses. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.01 GENERAL A. VRF equipment, wiring and controls shall be installed as shown on the drawings, specified herein and in strict accordance with manufacturer’s recommendations. B. Units shall be installed level and plumb. Roof mounted units shall be mounted as shown on the drawings. At a minimum, provide a premanufactured galvanized steel support system suitable for the application; Rectorseal Big Foot or approved equal. equipment curbs compatible with the roof type. C. Refrigerant line sets exposed to the weather shall be neatly routed and weather protected within a factory fabricated sheet metal duct system; Rectorseal Model RD or approved equal. Support the duct system on the roof with galvanized steel frame type supports with rubber/PVC feet; Rectorseal RPS Series or approved equal. Support spacing shall be per manufacturer’s recommendations. D. Units shall be installed to allow adequate service to all components and valves. Refer to manufacturer’s installationinstructions for service andairflow clearance recommendations. E. The system shall be installed by a factory trained and certified contractor/dealer. The bidders shall be required to submit training certification proof with bid documents and submittals. The mechanical contractor’s installation price shall be based on the system’s installation requirements. The mechanical contractor bids with complete knowledge of the HVAC system requirements. Contractors shall provide training certificates during the submittal phase. Contactor’s certification is subject to validation at any time on the job site during the course of construction. F. Install a full port refrigeration ball valve with Schrader valve on the outdoor unit connections toeachRCM.Where refrigerant mainfeedsthrough theRCM todownstream RCM’s, install the valves on each indoor unit connection. Install a full port refrigeration ball valve with Schrader valve on the connections to each indoor unit. Refer to Section 23 23 00 – Refrigerant Piping, Insulation and Accessories for additional requirements. G. Provisions shall be made for expansion and contraction in the piping system. Install in conformance with manufacturer’s guidelines. 3.02 INSTALLATION SITE VISITS A. The manufacturer’s representative/vendor shall make periodic site visits during the installation of the systems to ensure that the systems are installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. The individual visiting the site to perform inspections shall not be employed by the Mechanical Contractor. The individual visiting the site to perform inspections shall have a minimum of three (3) years of experience in the installation and service of VRF systems and shall be certified by the manufacturer as a trainer/instructor for installation, commissioning, service, and troubleshooting classes. If necessary, this individual may be an employee of the VRF system manufacturer. Certification documentation for the individual visiting the site shall be included in the VRF submittal. B. The manufacturer’s representative/vendor shall provide a written report of each visit including any deficiencies found during the installation of the systems. Indexed photographs of the deficient items shall be submitted with the report. Subsequent reports shall include pictures of the corrected areas. All deficiencies noted by the manufacturer’s representative/vendor shall be corrected by the contractor at no additional cost to the contract. The manufacturer’s representative/vendor’s report and the contractor’s responses shall be submitted to the Architect within 2 weeks of the date of the site visit. A report must be submitted even if there are no deficiencies. The manufacturer’s representative/vendor shall make site visits as follows: 1. Within the first week of piping installation. 2. Upon completion of the first floor of piping. 3. A minimum of once per month until the system is completely installed. Jordan & Skala Engineers 23 8129 -15VARIABLE REFRIGERANT FLOW HVAC SYSTEMS 4. All piping must be inspected and approved by the manufacturer’s representative/vendor prior to concealment. The manufacturer’s representative/vendor’s written reports must be submitted to and approved by the Architect prior to concealment. C. The contractor shall coordinate with the manufacturer’s representative/vendor to provide adequate notice for when site visits are required. 3.03 STARTUP SERVICE A. Engage a factory-authorized service representative to perform startup service. Service shall include a report that includes any and all requirements the manufacturer requires to support the extended warranty specified. Mechanical installer shall be fully responsible for supporting/coordinating delivery of the required reports to ensure the specified warranty is provided. Startup service shall include the following documentation at a minimum: 1. The manufacturer’s warranty Process/Checklist Sheet. 2. Final “as built” VRF select report. 3. Commissioning report from Technician Utility Tool (TUT)/equivalent 4. Before and after pictures of test gauge for the pressure test and vacuum test. If the manufacturer requires the start-up technician to witness the pressure and vacuum tests, the test pressures shall be included in the signed start-up report. 5. Any and all other requirements the VRF manufacturer requires to attain the specified warranty. B. Verify that the systems are installed and connected according to manufacturer’s written instructions and the Contract Documents. Where conflicts exist between the manufacturer’s written instructions and the Contract Documents, the manufacturer’s written instructions shall take precedence, except in the cases of code compliance issues. C. Verify that electrical wiring installation complies with the manufacturer’s submittal and the installation requirements of Division 26 Sections. Where conflicts exist between the manufacturer’s written instructions and theDivision 26Sections, themanufacturer’s written instructions shall take precedence, except in the cases of code compliance issues or valve installation recommendations. D. Complete installation and startup checks according to manufacturer’s written instructions. E. After startup service and performance tests have been made, replace all air filters with new filters equivalent to the manufacturer’s supplied filters. In cases where equipment is provided with permanent washable filters, filters shall be cleaned. 3.04 COMMISSIONING/FUNCTIONAL TESTING A. Manufacturer shall provide a minimum of two (2) eight (8) hour days of technical support on-site to support the commissioning/functional testing process. 3.05 SYSTEM OPERATION DEMONSTRATION AND TRAINING A. Engage a factory-authorized service representative to train the Owner’s maintenance personnel to adjust, operate, and maintain system components, equipment, and controls (Minimum of one (1) four (4) hour day). B. Engage a factory-authorized service representative to train the Owner’s property management personnel on application software, access, tenant metering reports, creating/modifying reports and logs, and processing notifications and alarms (Minimum of one (1) four (4) hour day). C. Contractor shall instruct the Owner’s designated operating personnel in the proper operation and maintenance of the equipment as well as the operation and maintenance of the controls for the various systems in the building. Informal or unwitnessed instructions, or instructions to non-designated personnel, will not be acceptable. In addition to the instruction periods specified above, furnish classroom instructions for a minimum of one (1) eight (8) hour day. Prior arrangements for instruction periods shall be made with the Owner two (2) weeks prior to the actual training class. D. The training class shall include an in-depth review of installation, operation, and maintenance manuals with hands-on equipment presentations. Jordan & Skala Engineers 23 8129 -16VARIABLE REFRIGERANT FLOW HVAC SYSTEMS E. Document all training sessions and include attendance lists and complete contact information. F. Provide six (6) sets of written operating, maintenance, controls, and lubrication instructions to the owner for all installed systems and equipment as part of the Project Closeout Documents. Instructions shall include copies of all designated approved shop drawings, manufacturer’s descriptive data, control diagrams, wiring diagrams, and installation and operating instructions. Each copy shall be in a hardback binder suitably indexed and identified. G. The Contractor shall submit a final as-built refrigerant piping diagram with exact lengths and pipe diameters for each section of pipe. All outdoor units, indoor units, and refrigerant control modules shall be tagged with the same tagging used in the field and on the Drawings. A copy of this as-built diagram shall be submitted to the Owner, Engineer, and equipment manufacturer for use in future piping system modifications. END OF SECTION Jordan & Skala Engineers 23 8129 -17VARIABLE REFRIGERANT FLOW HVAC SYSTEMS SECTION 23 82 39 -ELECTRIC UNIT HEATERS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.01 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS A. All work specified herein shall be accomplished in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section 23 00 00 -HVAC General. 1.02 WORK INCLUDED A. Receipt, unloading, handling, proper storage and protection from damage of all materials. B. Layout and coordination of work with other trades. C. The work under this section shall include all labor, materials, accessories, services, and equipment necessary to furnish and install electric unit heaters complete as indicated on the Drawings and as specified herein. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.01 UNIT HEATERS A. Unit shall be of the horizontal or vertical discharge fan-forced propeller type. B. Casing shall be constructed of heavy gauge die-formed, furniture grade steel, phosphate coated and finished in baked enamel. C. The heating element shall be aluminum-finned with a copper clad steel sheath. D. Fan shall be direct drive propeller type designed specifically for unit heater applications. E. The motor shall be totally enclosed, thermally protected, continuous duty type selected to match airflow requirements. F. Unit shall be provided with the manufacturer’s standard mounting bracket for either ceiling or wall mounting as required. G. Unit shall be equipped with individually adjustable horizontal discharge louvers. H. Unit heaters shall be constructed in accordance with provisions of the National Electrical Code and shall be UL or ETL tested and listed to UL Standard 2021 – UL Standard for Safety Fixed and Location-Dedicated Electric Room Heaters. I. Wiring shall be designed for a single source power connection with elements, motor and control circuits subdivided and fused to conform to the latest National Electrical Code, OSHA and Underwriters Laboratories Inc. standards. All three phase heaters shall have balanced phases. A factory wired non-fused disconnect switch shall be provided. Control circuit voltage shall not exceed 120 volts. J. Unit heater shall be equipped with an automatic reset linear thermal cut-out, a fan delay switch, and control circuit transformer. K. Thermostat shall be unit mounted or wall mounted as shown on the Drawings. L. Units shall be QMark, Markel, Trane, Modine, Indeeco, Berko or approved equal. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.01 INSTALLATION A. All units shall be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. END OF SECTION 238239 Jordan & Skala Engineers ELECTRIC UNIT HEATERS 23 8239 -1 SECTION 23 82 39.19 -ELECTRIC WALL HEATERS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.01 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS A. All work specified herein shall be accomplished in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section 23 00 00 -HVAC General. 1.02 WORK INCLUDED A. Receipt, unloading, handling, proper storage and protection from damage of all materials. B. Layout and coordination of work with other trades. C. The work under this section shall include all labor, materials, accessories, services, and equipment necessary to furnish and install wall heaters complete as indicated on the Drawings and as specified herein. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.01 WALL HEATERS A. Unit shall be completely factory assembled, wired, tested and shipped as a single assembly; capacity shall be as indicated on the Drawings. B. Unit heaters shall be constructed in accordance with provisions of the National Electrical Code and shall be UL or ETL tested and listed to UL Standard 2021 – UL Standard for Safety Fixed and Location-Dedicated Electric Room Heaters. C. Front grille shall be 16-gauge steel or aluminum finished in baked enamel or anodized with downflow discharge louvers. D. Element shall consist of helically coiled nickel chromium alloy resistance wire enclosed in corrosion resistant sheaths. E. Controls shall include fan delay switch, built-in thermostat, automatic reset thermal overload switch and a non-fused disconnect power switch. F. Unit shall be designed to either recess into the wall or for surface mounting as scheduled, and shall include all mounting accessories. G. Unit shall be Raywall, QMark, Markel, Berko, Indeeco or approved equal. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.01 INSTALLATION A. All units shall be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. END OF SECTION 23 8239.19 Jordan & Skala Engineers ELECTRIC WALL HEATERS 23 8239.19 -1 