PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of Contract, including all specification sections regarding this Division and Division 1, apply to work of this Division. 1.2 SUMMARY A. This Section specifies the basic requirements for mechanical installations and includes requirements common to more than one section of Division 23. It expands and supplements the requirements specified in sections of Division 1. It outlines the basic requirements for the complete Division 23 installation. B. Codes:  All work shall comply with the requirements of: 1. Florida Building Code 8th Edition (2023) a. Building Volume b. Mechanical Volume c. Plumbing Volume d. Fuel Gas Volume e. Energy Conservation Volume 2. Florida Fire Prevention Code – 8th Edition (2023) 3. State Requirements for Educational Facilities (SREF) -2014 4. All standards referenced in the Florida Building Code 8h Edition (2023) apply to work of this division regardless which volume of the code it is documented. C. Definitions 1. Provide:  The term “provide” used in this division shall include labor, materials, equipment and special provisions necessary to install and test complete the item or system indicated.  Items called for, implied, or required to make the system operate properly shall be installed under the contractor’s basic scope of work. 2. Install: The term “install” used in this division shall include labor materials and special provisions necessary to install and test complete the item or system provided by others. Items called for, implied, or required to make the system operate properly shall be installed under the contractor’s basic scope of work. 3. Furnish: The term “furnish” used in this division shall include the equipment only to be turned over to another division for installation or for the end user to utilize as they see fit. BASIC MECHANICAL REQUIREMENTS 230000 -1 1.3 ACCESSIBILITY A. Install equipment and materials to provide required access for servicing and maintenance.  Coordinate the final location of concealed equipment and devices requiring access with final location of required access panels and doors.  Allow ample space for removal of all parts that require replacement or servicing.  Extend all grease fittings to an accessible location. B. The contractor will be responsible for reconfiguring equipment that the owner or engineer deems to be inaccessible. 1.4 MECHANICAL INSTALLATIONS: A. Coordinate mechanical equipment and materials installation with other building components.  Verify all dimensions by field measurements.  Verify final locations for rough-ins with field measurements and with the requirements of the actual equipment to be connected.  Arrange for chases, slots, and openings in other building components to allow for mechanical installations. B. Coordinate the installation of required supporting devices and sleeves to be set in poured in place concrete and other structural components, as they are constructed.  Sequence, coordinate, and integrate installations of mechanical materials and equipment for efficient flow of the work.  Give particular attention to large equipment requiring positioning prior to closing-in the building.  Coordinate the cutting and patching of building components to accommodate the installation of mechanical equipment and materials. C. Where mounting heights are not detailed or dimensioned, install mechanical services and overhead equipment to provide the maximum headroom possible.  Coordinate the installation of mechanical materials and equipment above ceilings with suspension system, light fixtures, and other installations. D. Coordinate connection of mechanical systems with exterior underground and overhead utilities and services.  Comply with requirements of governing regulations, franchised service companies, and controlling agencies.  Provide required connection for each service. 1.5 DRAWINGS AND SPECIFICATIONS: A. Separate divisional drawings and specifications shall not relieve the contractor from full responsibility to complete all work which may be indicated on any of the drawings or in any division of the specification. BASIC MECHANICAL REQUIREMENTS 230000 -2 B. The specifications and drawings are complementary and are to be taken together for a complete interpretation of the work. C. The drawings of necessity utilize symbols and schematic diagrams to indicate various items of work.  Therefore, no interpretation shall be made from the limitations of symbols and diagrams that any elements necessary for a complete installation are excluded. D. Certain details appear on the drawings, which are specific with regard to the dimensioning and positioning of the work.  These details are intended only for the purpose of establishing general feasibility.  They do not obviate field coordination for the indicated work. E. Examine the architectural, structural, electrical and mechanical drawings and specifications prior to submitting bid.  Architectural and structural drawings take precedence over mechanical drawings with reference to building construction, location of plumbing fixtures, and any other similar fixed items. F. The architect shall be notified of any discrepancies, omissions, conflicts or interferences, which occur between drawings and specifications.  If such notification is received in adequate time, additional data or changes will be issued by addendum to all bidders.  If discrepancies, omissions, conflicts or interferences are not reported the contractor shall provide, at the engineers’ discretion, at no cost to the contract. 1.6 CUTTING AND PATCHING: A. Do not endanger or damage installed work through procedures and processes of cutting and patching.  Do not cut structural members without prior written approval of the structural engineer or architect. B. Arrange for repairs required to restore other work, because of damage caused as a result of mechanical installations.  No additional compensation will be authorized for cutting and patching work that is necessitated by ill-timed, defective, or non.conforming installations. C. Perform cutting, fitting, and patching of mechanical equipment and materials required to:  uncover work to provide for installation of ill-timed work; remove and replace defective work; remove samples of installed work as specified for testing; install equipment and materials in existing structures; upon written instructions from the architect/engineer, uncover and restore work to provide for architect/engineer observation of concealed work. 1.7 MECHANICAL SUBMITTALS A. Refer to the Conditions of the Contract (General and Supplementary), Division 1 and this Section for submittal definitions, requirements, and procedures.  Submittal of BASIC MECHANICAL REQUIREMENTS 230000 -3 shop drawings, product data, and samples will be accepted only when submitted by the contractor. B. Data submitted from subcontractors and material suppliers directly to the architect/engineer will not be processed. C. All submittals shall be 3-hole punched and inserted in a maximum 3” ring binder.  D. Submittals containing multiple sections shall be separated by clearly labeled dividers and an index identifying each section. E. Product Data:  For each type of product indicated. F. Shop Drawings: 1. Fabrication, assembly, and installation, including plans, elevations, sections, components, and attachments to other work. 2. Factory-and shop-fabricated ducts and fittings. 3. Duct layout indicating sizes, configuration, and static-pressure classes. 4. Elevation of top of ducts. 5. Dimensions of main duct runs from building grid lines. 6. Fittings. 7. Reinforcement and spacing. 8. Seam and joint construction. 9. Penetrations through fire-rated and other partitions. 10. Equipment installation based on equipment being used on Project. 11. Locations for duct accessories, including dampers, turning vanes, and access doors and panels. 12. Hangers and supports, including methods for duct and building attachment and vibration isolation. G. Coordination Drawings:  Plans, drawn 1/4“ = 1’-0” scale, on which the following items are shown and coordinated with each other, using input from installers of the items involved: 1. Duct installation, indicating coordination with general construction, building components, and other building services.  Indicate proposed changes to duct layout. 2. Suspended ceiling components. 3. Structural members to which duct will be attached. 4. Size and location of initial access modules for acoustical tile. 5. Penetrations of smoke barriers and fire-rated construction. 6. Items penetrating finished ceiling including the following: a. Lighting fixtures. b. Air outlets and inlets. c. Speakers. d. Sprinklers. e. Access panels. f. Perimeter moldings. g. Cable Trays. BASIC MECHANICAL REQUIREMENTS 230000 -4 1.8 PRODUCT LISTING A. Prepare listing of major mechanical equipment and materials for the project.  Submit this listing as a part of the submittal requirement specified. 1.9 PRODUCTS A. When two or more items of same material or equipment are required (plumbing fixtures, pumps, valves, air conditioning units, etc.) they shall be of the same manufacturer.  Product manufacturer uniformity does not apply to raw materials, bulk materials, pipe, tube, fittings (except flanged and grooved types), sheet metal, wire, steel bar stock, welding rods, solder, fasteners, motors for dissimilar equipment units, and similar items used in work, except as otherwise indicated.  Provide products which are compatible within systems and other connected items. 1.10 NAMEPLATE DATA A. Provide permanent operational data nameplate on each item of power operated mechanical equipment, indicating manufacturer, product name, model number, serial number, capacity, operating and power characteristics, labels of tested compliances, and similar essential data.  Locate nameplates in an accessible location. 1.11 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Deliver products to project properly identified with names, model numbers, types, grades, compliance labels, and similar information needed for distinct identifications; adequately packaged and protected to prevent damage during shipment, storage, and handling. B. Store equipment and materials at the site, unless off-site storage is authorized in writing.  Protect stored equipment and materials from damage. C. Contractor shall store all materials raised above grade level.  Air handling and air distribution equipment shall be stored with all openings environmentally sealed until installed in an enclosed environmentally safe place. 1.12 RECORD DOCUMENTS BASIC MECHANICAL REQUIREMENTS 230000 -5 A. Refer to the Division 1 Section:  PROJECT CLOSEOUT or PROJECT RECORD DOCUMENTS for requirements. B. Mark Specifications and drawings to indicate approved substitutions; Change Orders; actual equipment and materials used. 1.13 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE DATA A. In addition to the information required by Division 1 for Maintenance Data, include the following information: B. Description of function, normal operating characteristics and limitations, performance curves, engineering data and tests, and complete nomenclature and commercial numbers of all replaceable parts. C. Manufacturer's printed operating procedures to include start-up, break-in, routine and normal operating instructions; regulation, control, stopping, shut-down, and emergency instructions; and summer and winter operating instructions. D. Maintenance procedures for routine preventative maintenance and troubleshooting; disassembly, repair, and reassembly; aligning and adjusting instructions. 1.14 WARRANTIES A. Compile and assemble the warranties specified in Division 23, into a separated set of vinyl covered, three ring binders, tabulated and indexed for easy reference. B. Provide complete warranty information for each item to include product or equipment to include date of beginning of warranty or bond; duration of warranty or bond; and names, addresses, and telephone numbers and procedures for filing a claim and obtaining warranty services. 1.15 CLEANING A. Refer to the Division 1 Section:  PROJECT CLOSEOUT or FINAL CLEANING for general requirements for final cleaning. B. Refer to Division 23 Section:  TESTING, ADJUSTING, AND BALANCING for requirements for cleaning filters, strainers, and mechanical systems prior to final acceptance. 1.16 THIRD PARTY CERTIFICATION A. All packaged equipment shall be Independently Third Party labeled as a system for its intended use by a Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory (NRTL) in accordance BASIC MECHANICAL REQUIREMENTS 230000 -6 with OSHA Federal Regulation 29CFR1910.399 and NFPA 70, "National Electrical Code" (NEC), Article 90-7. 1.17 FIELD EVALUATIONS A. No work shall be concealed without notifying the design team. All requests for field evaluations shall be made in writing (48) hours before date requested.  Requests shall be by the General Contractor to the Project Architect. B. Written request shall include scope and status of work being evaluated. C. Contractor and sub-contractor knowledgeable of the project shall be present at all inspections and field evaluations. END OF SECTION 230000 BASIC MECHANICAL REQUIREMENTS 230000 -7 THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK BASIC MECHANICAL REQUIREMENTS 230000 -8 PART 1 -GENERAL I. SUMMARY A. Section includes general requirements for single-phase and polyphase, general-purpose, horizontal, small and medium, squirrel-cage induction motors for use on ac power systems up to 600 V and installed at equipment manufacturer's factory or shipped separately by equipment manufacturer for field installation. II. COORDINATION A. Coordinate features of motors, installed units, and accessory devices to be compatible with the following: 1. Motor controllers. 2. Torque, speed, and horsepower requirements of the load. 3. Ratings and characteristics of supply circuit and required control sequence. 4. Ambient and environmental conditions of installation location. PART 2 -PRODUCTS I. GENERAL MOTOR REQUIREMENTS A. Comply with requirements in this Section except when stricter requirements are specified in HVAC equipment schedules or Sections. B. Comply with NEMA MG 1 unless otherwise indicated. II. MOTOR CHARACTERISTICS A. Duty:  Continuous duty at ambient temperature of 40 deg C and at altitude of 3300 feet (1000 m) above sea level. B. Capacity and Torque Characteristics:  Sufficient to start, accelerate, and operate connected loads at designated speeds, at installed altitude and environment, with indicated operating sequence, and without exceeding nameplate ratings or considering service factor. III. POLYPHASE MOTORS A. Description:  NEMA MG 1, Design B, medium induction motor. B. Efficiency:  Energy efficient, as defined in NEMA MG 1. C. Service Factor: 1.15. D. Multispeed Motors:  Variable torque. 1. For motors with 2:1 speed ratio, consequent pole, single winding. 2. For motors with other than 2:1 speed ratio, separate winding for each speed. E. Rotor:  Random-wound, squirrel cage. F. Bearings:  Regreasable, shielded, antifriction ball bearings suitable for radial and thrust loading. G. Temperature Rise: Match insulation rating. H. Insulation:  Class F. I. Code Letter Designation: 1. Motors 15HP and Larger: NEMA starting Code F or Code G. 2. Motors Smaller than 15HP:  Manufacturer's standard starting characteristic. J. Enclosure Material:  Cast iron for motor frame sizes 324T and larger; rolled steel for motor frame sizes smaller. IV. POLYPHASE MOTORS WITH ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS A. Motors Used with Reduced-Voltage and Multispeed Controllers: Match wiring connection requirements for controller with required motor leads.  Provide terminals in motor terminal box, suited to control method. B. Motors Used with Variable Frequency Controllers: 1. Windings: Copper magnet wire with moisture-resistant insulation varnish, designed and tested to resist transient spikes, high frequencies, and short time rise pulses produced by pulse-width modulated inverters. 2. Energy-and Premium-Efficient Motors:  Class B temperature rise; Class F insulation. 3. Inverter-Duty Motors:  Class F temperature rise; Class H insulation. 4. Thermal Protection:  Comply with NEMA MG 1 requirements for thermally protected motors. V. SINGLE-PHASE MOTORS A. Motors larger than 1/20 hp shall be one of the following, to suit starting torque and requirements of specific motor application: 1. Permanent-split capacitor. 2. Split phase. 3. Capacitor start, inductor run. 4. Capacitor start, capacitor run. B. Multispeed Motors:  Variable-torque, permanent-split-capacitor type. C. Bearings:  Prelubricated, antifriction ball bearings or sleeve bearings suitable for radial and thrust loading. D. Motors 1/20 HP and Smaller:  Shaded-pole type. E. Thermal Protection:  Internal protection to automatically open power supply circuit to motor when winding temperature exceeds a safe value calibrated to temperature rating of motor insulation.  Thermal-protection device shall automatically reset when motor temperature returns to normal range. PART 3 -EXECUTION (Not Applicable) END OF SECTION 230513 THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SUMMARY A. Section includes design, performance criteria, refrigerants, controls, and installation requirements for air-cooled scroll compressor chillers. 1.2 SUBMITTALS A. Submit shop drawings and product data in accordance with the specifications. B. Submittals shall include the following: 1. Dimensioned plan and elevation view drawings, required clearances, and location of all field connections 2. Summary of all auxiliary utility requirements such as electricity, water, etc. Summary shall indicate quality and quantity of each required utility. 3. Single line schematic drawing of the field power hookup requirements, indicating all items that are furnished. 4. Schematic diagram of control system indicating points for field interface/connection. 5. Diagram shall fully delineate field and factory wiring. 6. Installation and operating manuals. 1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. ARI Certification:  Certify chiller according to ARI 590 certification program. B. ARI Rating:  Rate water chiller performance according to requirements in ARI 550/590, "Water Chilling Packages Using the Vapor Compression Cycle." C. ASHRAE Compliance: ASHRAE 15 for safety code for mechanical refrigeration. D. ASHRAE/IESNA 90.1-2013 Compliance:  Applicable requirements in ASHRAE/IESNA 90.1-2013, Section 6 -"Heating, Ventilating, and Air-Conditioning." E. ASME Compliance:  Fabricate and stamp water chiller heat exchangers to comply with ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code. F. Comply with NFPA 70. 1.4 WARRANTY A. Provide a full parts and labor warranty for one year from start-up or 18 months from shipment, whichever occurs first. 1. Provide an additional year 2-10 manufacturer full parts and labor warranty as part of the equipment cost. 1.5 PREVENTATIVE MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT: A. Preventative maintenance terms: 1. Add Alt#1 – provide an alternate price for all preventative maintenance services listed in the attached sample agreement provided herein, for a period commencing on the date of start-up and ending five years from the date of start-up. Years one through five. 2. Add Alt#2 – provide an alternate price for all preventative maintenance services listed in the attached sample agreement provided herein, for a period commencing upon expiration of the services described in alternate 3 and ending ten years from the date of start-up. Years six through ten. B. Manufacturer Preventative Maintenance: 1. If awarded, the owner will issue a separate purchase order each year so that the preventative maintenance agreement is extended. 2. Payments for services provided under this agreement become due upon the completion of each service call and associated reporting. Where multiple service visits are scheduled in a year, amounts attributable to each service call will be pro-rated according to the number of services scheduled. 3. If awarded, the contractor is required to execute and submit the preventative maintenance agreement to the HCPS maintenance department within 4 weeks of equipment start-up. Failure to submit the agreement timely, and/or failure to schedule and perform the tasks listed in the sample agreement included herein does not relieve the vendor of the responsibility for proper maintenance of the equipment provided under this contract. 4. Service calls are to be scheduled with the HCPS maintenance department for a minimum of 2 weeks in advance of the scheduled date. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 PACKAGED AIR-COOLED WATER CHILLERS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Daikin 2. Trane 3. York 4. Carrier B. Description: Provide and install as shown on the plans factory-assembled, factory-charged air-cooled scroll compressor packaged chillers in the quantity specified. Each chiller shall consist of hermetic tandem scroll compressor sets (total four compressors), brazed plate evaporator, air-cooled condenser section, microprocessor-based control system and all components necessary for controlled unit operation. C. Fabricate base, frame, and attachment to water chiller components strong enough to resist movement during a seismic event when water chiller base is anchored to field support structure. D. DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 1. Flow Range: The chiller shall have the ability to support variable flow range down to 40% of nominal design (based on AHRI conditions). 2. Operating Range: The chiller shall have the ability to control leaving chilled fluid temperature from 15F to 65F. 3. General: Provide a complete scroll compressor packaged chiller as specified herein and as shown on the drawings. The unit shall be in accordance with the standards referenced in section 1.02 and any local codes in effect. 4. Performance: Refer to the schedule of performance on the drawings. The chiller shall be capable of stable operation to a minimum percentage of full load (without hot gas bypass) of 25%. Performance shall be in accordance with AHRI Standard 550/590. 5. Acoustics: Sound pressure levels for the unit shall not exceed the following specified levels. All manufacturers shall provide the necessary sound treatment ( parts and labor) to meet these levels if required. Sound data shall be provided with the quotation. Test shall be in accordance with AHRI Standard 370. E. CHILLER COMPONENTS 1. Compressor a. The compressors shall be sealed hermetic, scroll type with crankcase oil heater and suction strainer. The compressor motor shall be refrigerant gas cooled, high torque, hermetic induction type, two-pole, with inherent thermal protection on all three phases and shall be mounted on RIS vibration isolator pads. The compressors shall be equipped with an internal module providing compressor protection and communication capability. 2. Evaporator a. The evaporator shall be a compact, high efficiency, dual circuit, brazed plate-to-plate type heat exchanger consisting of parallel stainless steel plates. Vent and drain connections shall be provided in the inlet and outlet chilled water piping by the installing contractor. b. The evaporator shall be protected with an external, electric resistance heater plate. The evaporator and suction piping to the compressors shall be insulated with 3/4” (19 mm) thick CFC and HCFC-free closed-cell flexible elastomeric foam insulation material with 100% adhesive coverage. The insulation shall have an additional outer protective layer of 3mm thick PE embossed film to provide superior damage resistance. Insulation without the protective outer film shall not be acceptable. UV resistance level shall meet or exceed a rating of ‘Good’ in accordance with the UNI ISO 4892 -2/94 testing method. This combination of a heater plate and insulation shall provide freeze protection down to -20°F (-29°C) ambient air temperature. c. The water-side maximum design pressure shall be rated at a minimum of 435 psig (3000 kPa). Evaporators shall be designed and constructed according to, and listed by Underwriters Laboratories (UL). 3. Condenser a. Condenser fans shall be propeller type arranged for vertical air discharge and individually driven by direct-drive fan motors. The fans shall be equipped with a heavy-gauge vinyl-coated fan guard. Fan motors shall be TEAO type with permanently lubricated ball bearings, inherent overload protection, three-phase, direct-drive, 1140 rpm. Each fan section shall be partitioned to avoid cross circulation. b. Coil shall be microchannel design and shall have a series of flat tubes containing multiple, parallel flow microchannels layered between the refrigerant manifolds. Tubes shall be 9153 aluminum alloy.  Tubes made of 3102 alloy or other alloys of lower corrosion resistance shall not be accepted. Coils shall consist of a two-pass arrangement. Each condenser coil shall be factory leak tested with high-pressure air under water. Condenser coils shall include baked epoxy coating providing 10,000+ hour salt spray resistance (ASTM B117-90) applied to both the coil and the coil frames, no exceptions. 4. Refrigerant Circuit a. Each of the two refrigerant circuits shall include a replaceable-core refrigerant filter-drier, sight glass with moisture indicator, liquid line solenoid valve (no exceptions), expansion valve, and insulated suction line. 5. Construction a. Unit formed sheet metal components shall be painted using a corrosion resistant paint system, for aesthetics and long-term durability. Paint system will include a base primer with a high-quality polyester resin topcoat. Painted galvanized parts shall be G60 or greater and finished, unabraded panel surfaces shall be capable to be exposed to an ASTM B117 salt spray environment and exhibit no visible red rust at a minimum of 3,000 hours exposure. Finished, abraded surfaces shall be tested per ASTM D1654, having a mean scribe creepage not exceeding 1/16” at 1,000 hours minimum exposure to an ASTM B117 salt spray environment. b. Upper condenser coil and base section of unit shall have protective, 12 GA, PVC-coated, 0.50” close mesh wire grille guards and have painted steel wraps enclosing the coil end sections and piping. c. Unpainted galvanized steel cabinets are not acceptable. 6. Control System a. A centrally located weatherproof control panel shall contain the field power connection points, control interlock terminals, and control system. Box shall be designed in accordance with NEMA 3R rating. Power and starting components shall include factory circuit breaker for fan motors and control circuit, individual contactors for each fan motor, solid-state compressor three-phase motor overload protection, inherent fan motor overload protection and two power blocks (one per circuit) for connection to remote, contractor supplied disconnect switches. Hinged access doors shall be lockable. Barrier panels or separate enclosures are required to protect against accidental contact with line voltage when accessing the control system. b. Shall include high short circuit current rating of 65,000 amps with single-point disconnect switch 7. Unit Controller a. An advanced DDC microprocessor unit controller with a 5-line by 22.character liquid crystal display provides the operating and protection functions. The controller shall take preemptive limiting action in case of high discharge pressure or low evaporator pressure. The controller shall contain the following features as a minimum: b. The unit shall be protected in two ways: (1) by alarms that shut the unit down and require manual reset to restore unit operation and (2) by limit alarms that reduce unit operation in response to some out-of-limit condition. Shut down alarms shall activate an alarm signal. c. Shutdown Alarms 1) No evaporator water flow (auto-restart) 2) Sensor failures 3) Low evaporator pressure 4) Evaporator freeze protection 5) High condenser pressure 6) Outside ambient temperature (auto-restart) 7) Motor protection system 8) Phase voltage protection (Optional) d. Limit Alarms 1) Condenser pressure stage down, unloads unit at high discharge pressures. 2) Low ambient lockout, shuts off unit at low ambient temperatures. 3) Low evaporator pressure hold, holds stage #1 until pressure rises. 4) Low evaporator pressure unload, shuts off one compressor. e. Unit Enable Section 1) Enables unit operation from either local keypad, digital input, or BAS f. Unit Mode Selection 1) Selects standard cooling, ice, glycol, or test operation mode g. Analog Inputs: 1) Reset of leaving water temperature, 4-20 mA\ 2) Current Limit h. Digital Inputs 1) Unit off switch 2) Remote start/stop 3) Flow switch 4) Ice mode switch, converts operation and setpoints for ice production 5) Motor protection i. Digital Outputs 1) Shutdown alarm; field wired, activates on an alarm condition, off when alarm is cleared 2) Evaporator pump; field wired, starts pump when unit is set to start 3) Condenser fan control -The unit controller shall provide control of condenser fans based on compressor discharge pressure. j. Building Automation System (BAS) Interface 1) Factory mounted DDC controller(s) shall support operation on a BACnet®, Modbus® or LONMARK ® network via one of the data link / physical layers listed below as specified by the successful Building Automation System (BAS) supplier. 2) BACnet MS/TP master (Clause 9) 3) BACnet IP, (Annex J) 4) BACnet ISO 8802-3, (Ethernet) 5) LONMARK FTT-10A. The unit controller shall be LONMARK® certified. 6) The information communicated between the BAS and the factory mounted unit controllers shall include the reading and writing of data to allow unit monitoring, control and alarm notification as specified in the unit sequence of operation and the unit points list. 7) For chillers communicating over a LONMARK network, the corresponding LONMARK eXternal Interface File (XIF) shall be provided with the chiller submittal data. 8) All communication from the chiller unit controller as specified in the points list shall be via standard BACnet objects. Proprietary BACnet objects shall not be allowed. BACnet communications shall conform to the BACnet protocol (ANSI/ASHRAE135-2001). A BACnet Protocol Implementation Conformance Statement (PICS) shall be provided along with the unit submittal. F. OPTIONS AND ACCESSORIES 1. The following options are to be included: a. Low Ambient Control: Fan VFD allows unit operation from 32°F down to .10°F (-23.3 C). Fan cycling not acceptable. b. Phase loss with under/over voltage protection and with LED indication of the fault type to guard against compressor motor burnout. c. Compressor Sound Reduction -Acoustic reduction blankets shall be factory installed on each compressor. d. The following accessories, if selected, are to be included: e. Rubber-in-shear vibration isolators for field installation with wind rating f. Factory-mounted thermal dispersion type flow switch g. Chiller manufacturer to install strainer at the evaporator inlet and sized for the design flow rate , with perforation diameter of 0.063" with blowdown valve and Victaulic couplings. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 DELIVERY A. Delivery to site shall be included in the bid price of the chiller. B. Manufacturer will coordinate with installing contractor T.B.D for delivery location, time, rigging requirements, etc. 3.2 INSTALLATION A. By Installing Contractor under separate bid. 3.3 STARTUP SERVICE A. Provide Factory startup service. B. Inspect field-assembled components, equipment installation, and piping and electrical connections for proper assemblies, installations, and connections. C. Prepare a written startup report that records results of tests and inspections. A copy of this report shall be turned over to the installing contractor. END OF SECTION 236423 THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SUMMARY A. Section Includes: 1. Constant-air-volume, Variable air volume, single-zone and multi-zone air-handling units designated as AHU on the plans. 1.2 SUBMITTALS A. First two paragraphs below are defined in Division 01 Section "Submittal Procedures" as "Action Submittals." B. No equipment shall be fabricated or delivered until the receipt of approved shop drawings from the Owner or Owner's approved representative. C. AHU manufacturer shall provide the following information with each shop drawing/product data submission: 1. All electrical, piping, and ductwork requirements, including sizes, connection loca.tions, and connection method recommendations. 2. Each component of the unit shall be identified and mechanical specifications shall be provided for unit and accessories describing construction, components, and options. 3. All performance data, including capacities and airside and waterside pressure drops, for components. 4. Fan curves shall be provided for fans with the design operating points indicated. Data shall be corrected to actual operating conditions, temperatures, and altitudes. 5. For units utilizing multiple fans in a fan section, a fan curve shall be provided showing the performance of the entire bank of fans at design conditions. In addition, a fan curve shall be provided showing the performance of each individual fan in the bank of fans at design conditions. Also a fan curve shall be provided showing the perfor.mance of the bank of fans, if one fan is down. The percent redundancy of the bank of fans with one fan down shall be noted on the fan curve or in the tabulated fan data. 6. A filter schedule must be provided for each air handling unit supplied by the air han.dling unit manufacturer.  Schedule shall detail unit tag, unit size, corresponding filter section location within the AHU, filter arrangement (e.g. angled/flat), filter depth, filter type (e.g. pleated media), MERV rating, and filter quantity and size. 7. A schedule detailing necessary trap height shall be provided for each air handling unit.  Schedule shall detail unit tag, unit size, appropriate trap schematic with rec-ommended trap dimensions, and unit supplied base rail height.  Contractor shall be responsible for additional trap height required for trapping and insulation beyond the unit supplied base rail height by adequate housekeeping pad. 8. An electrical MCA -MOP schedule shall be provided for each electrical circuit to which field-power must be supplied.  Schedule to detail unit tag, circuit description, voltage/phase/hertz, Minimum Circuit Ampacity (MCA), and calculated Maximum Overcurrent Protection (MOP). 9. Sound data shall be provided using AHRI 260 test methods.  Unit discharge, inlet, and radiated sound power levels in dB shall be provided for 63, 125, 250, 500, 1000, 2000, 4000 and 8000Hz. D. The AHU manufacturer shall provide appropriate sets of submittals as referenced in the General Conditions and shall submit to the Owner electronic copies of the IOM. E. The AHU manufacturer shall list any exceptions to the specification. 1.3 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories:  Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. B. NFPA Compliance:  Comply with NFPA 90A for design, fabrication, and installation of air-handling units and components. C. ARI Certification:  Air-handling units and their components shall be factory tested according to ARI 430, "Central-Station Air-Handling Units," and shall be listed and labeled by ARI. D. ASHRAE Compliance:  Applicable requirements in ASHRAE 62.1-2016, Section 5 ."Systems and Equipment" and Section 7 -"Construction and Startup." E. ASHRAE/IESNA 90.1-2016 Compliance:  Applicable requirements in ASHRAE/IESNA 90.1-2016, Section 6 -"Heating, Ventilating, and Air-Conditioning." F. Comply with NFPA 70. 1.4 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Comply with manufacturer's installation instructions for rigging, unloading, and transporting units. B. Units shall ship fully assembled up to practical shipping and rigging limitations.  Units not shipped fully assembled shall have tags and airflow arrows on each section to indicate location and orientation in direction of airflow. Shipping splits shall be clearly defined on submittal drawings. Cost associated with non-conformance to shop drawings shall be the responsibility of the manufacturer. Each section shall have lifting lugs for field rigging, lifting and final placement of AHU section(s). AHU's less than 100-inches wide shall allow for forklift transport and maneuverability on the jobsite. C. Deliver units to jobsite with fan motor(s), sheave(s), and belt(s) completely assembled and mounted in units. D. Unit shall be shipped in a clear shrink-wrap or stretch-wrap to protect unit from in-transit rain and debris per ASHRAE 62.1 recommendations. E. Installing contractor shall be responsible for storing AHU in a clean, dry place and protect from weather and construction traffic. Handle carefully to avoid damage to components, enclosures, and finish. 1.5 START-UP AND OPERATING REQUIREMENTS A. Do not operate units for any purpose, temporary or permanent, until ductwork is clean, filters in place, bearings lubricated (if applicable), condensate properly trapped, piping connections verified and leak-tested, belts aligned and tensioned, all shipping braces removed, bearing set screws torqued, and fan has been test run under observation. 1.6 WARRANTY A. AHU manufacturer shall provide, at no additional cost, a standard parts warranty that covers a period of one year from unit start-up or 18 months from shipment, whichever occurs first.  This warrants that all products are free from defects in material and workmanship and shall meet the capacities and ratings set forth in the equipment manufacturer's catalog and bulletins. 1.7 PREVENTATIVE MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT: A. Preventative maintenance terms: 1. Add Alt#1 – provide an alternate price for all preventative maintenance services listed in the attached sample agreement provided herein, for a period commencing on the date of start-up and ending five years from the date of start-up. Years one through five. 2. Add Alt#2 – provide an alternate price for all preventative maintenance services listed in the attached sample agreement provided herein, for a period commencing upon expiration of the services described in alternate 3 and ending ten years from the date of start-up. Years six through ten. B. Manufacturer Preventative Maintenance: 1. If awarded, the owner will issue a separate purchase order each year so that the preventative maintenance agreement is extended. 2. Payments for services provided under this agreement become due upon the completion of each service call and associated reporting. Where multiple service visits are scheduled in a year, amounts attributable to each service call will be pro.rated according to the number of services scheduled. 3. If awarded, the contractor is required to execute and submit the preventative maintenance agreement to the HCPS maintenance department within 4 weeks of equipment start-up. Failure to submit the agreement timely, and/or failure to schedule and perform the tasks listed in the sample agreement included herein does not relieve the vendor of the responsibility for proper maintenance of the equipment provided under this contract. 4. Service calls are to be scheduled with the HCPS maintenance department for a minimum of 2 weeks in advance of the scheduled date. 1.8 EXTRA MATERIALS A. Furnish extra materials described below that match products installed and that are packaged with protective covering for storage and identified with labels describing contents. 1. Filters: None. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 MANUFACTURERS A. Product:  Subject to compliance with requirements, provide a comparable product by one of the following: 1. Trane 2. Carrier 3. Johnson Controls (York). 4. Daikin 5. Temtrol 2.2 UNIT CASINGS A. General Fabrication Requirements for Casings: 1. Forming:  Form walls, roofs, and floors with at least two breaks at each joint. 2. Casing Joints:  Sheet metal screws. 3. Sealing:  Seal all joints with water-resistant sealant. 4. Factory Finish for Steel and Galvanized-Steel Casings:  Apply manufacturer's standard primer immediately after cleaning and pretreating. 5. Airstream Surfaces:  Surfaces in contact with the airstream shall comply with requirements in ASHRAE 62.1-2016. B. Casing Insulation and Adhesive: 1. Materials:  Min. R-13 Foam Filled. 2. Location and Application: Encased between outside and inside casing. C. Inspection and Access Panels and Access Doors: 1. Panel and Door Fabrication:  Formed and reinforced, single-or double-wall and insulated panels of same materials and thicknesses as casing. 2. Inspection and Access Panels: a. Fasteners:  Two or more camlock type for panel lift-out operation. Arrangement shall allow panels to be opened against air-pressure differential. b. Gasket:  Neoprene, applied around entire perimeters of panel frames. c. Size:  Large enough to allow inspection and maintenance of air-handling unit's internal components. 3. Access Doors: a. Hinges: A minimum of two ball-bearing hinges or stainless-steel piano hinge and two wedge-lever-type latches, operable from inside and outside.  Arrange doors to be opened against air-pressure differential. b. Gasket:  Neoprene, applied around entire perimeters of panel frames. 4. Locations and Applications: a. Fan Section:  Doors. b. Access Section:  Doors. c. Coil Section:  Inspection and access panel. d. Damper Section: Doors. e. Filter Section: Doors large enough to allow periodic removal and installation of filters. f. Mixing Section:  Doors. D. Condensate Drain Pans: 1. Fabricated with two percent slope in at least two planes to collect condensate from cooling coils (including coil piping connections, coil headers, and return bends) and from humidifiers and to direct water toward drain connection. a. Length:  Extend drain pan downstream from leaving face to comply with ASHRAE 62.1-2016. b. Depth:  A minimum of 2 inches (50 mm) deep. 2. Double wall stainless steel construction. 3. Drain Connection:  Located at lowest point of pan and sized to prevent overflow. Terminate with threaded nipple on one end of pan. a. Minimum Connection Size: NPS 1 (DN 25). 4. Units with stacked coils shall have an intermediate drain pan to collect condensate from top coil. 2.3 FAN, DRIVE, AND MOTOR SECTION A. Fan and Drive Assemblies:  Statically and dynamically balanced and designed for continuous operation at maximum-rated fan speed and motor horsepower. 1. Shafts:  Designed for continuous operation at maximum-rated fan speed and motor horsepower, and with field-adjustable alignment. a. Turned, ground, and polished hot-rolled steel with keyway.  Ship with a protective coating of lubricating oil. b. Designed to operate at no more than 70 percent of first critical speed at top of fan's speed range. B. Centrifugal Fan Housings:  Formed-and reinforced-steel panels to form curved scroll housings with shaped cutoff and spun-metal inlet bell. 1. Bracing:  Steel angle or channel supports for mounting and supporting fan scroll, wheel, motor, and accessories. 2. Horizontal-Flanged, Split Housing:  Bolted construction. 3. Housing for Supply Fan:  Attach housing to fan-section casing with metal-edged flexible duct connector. 4. Flexible Connector:  Factory fabricated with a fabric strip 3-1/2 inches (89 mm) wide attached to 2 strips of 2-3/4-inch-(70-mm-) wide, 0.028-inch-(0.7-mm-) thick, galvanized-steel sheet or 0.032-inch-(0.8-mm-) thick aluminum sheets; select metal compatible with casing. a. Flexible Connector Fabric:  Glass fabric, double coated with neoprene. Fabrics, coatings, and adhesives shall comply with UL 181, Class 1. 1) Fabric Minimum Weight: 26 oz./sq. yd. (880 g/sq. m). 2) Fabric Tensile Strength: 480 lbf/inch (84 N/mm) in the warp and 360 lbf/inch (63 N/mm) in the filling. 3) Fabric Service Temperature: Minus 40 to plus 200 deg F (Minus 40 to plus 93 deg C). C. Belt Driven, Forward-Curved, Centrifugal Fan Wheels: 1. Inlet flange, backplate, and shallow blades with inlet and tip curved forward in direction of airflow and mechanically fastened to flange and backplate; cast-steel hub swaged to backplate and fastened to shaft with set screws. 2. Fan Shaft Bearings: Grease-Lubricated Bearings:  Self-aligning, pillow-block-type, ball or roller bearings with adapter mount and two-piece, cast-iron housing with grease lines extended to outside uni]. 3. Belt Drives:  Factory mounted, with adjustable alignment and belt tensioning, and with 1.3 service factor based on fan motor. 4. Pulleys:  Cast iron or cast steel with split, tapered bushing; dynamically balanced at factory. Motor Pulleys:  Adjustable pitch for use with 5-hp motors and smaller; fixed pitch for use with motors larger than 5-hp.  Select pulley size so pitch adjustment is at the middle of adjustment range at fan design conditions. 5. Belts:  Oil resistant, non-sparking, and non-static; in matched sets for multiple-belt drives. D. Direct drive plenum fan: 1. The fan shall be a single-width, single-inlet plenum fan. The fan blades shall be aluminum backward-inclined airfoil. Plenum fan shall be direct driven. 2. Fan sections containing multiple fans shall be controlled using a common control signal, such as the duct static control signal, to modulate the fan speed. E. Internal Vibration Isolation: Fans shall be factory mounted with manufacturer's standard vibration isolation mounting devices having a minimum static deflection of 2 inches (50 mm). F. Motor:  Comply with NEMA designation, temperature rating, service factor, enclosure type, and efficiency requirements for motors specified in Division 23 Section "Common Motor Requirements for HVAC Equipment." 1. Enclosure Type: Totally enclosed, fan cooled or ODP. 2. NEMA Premium (TM) efficient motors as defined in NEMA MG 1. 3. Motor Sizes:  Minimum size as indicated.  If not indicated, large enough so driven load will not require motor to operate in service factor range above 1.0. 4. Controllers, Electrical Devices, and Wiring:  Comply with requirements for electrical devices and connections specified in Division 26 Sections. 5. ECM Motors are not acceptable on new air handlers. 2.4 COIL SECTION A. General Requirements for Coil Section: 1. Multi-circuit refrigerant coils shall be interlaced, face split coils will not be accepted. 2. Chilled water coils shall be provided with a drain and vent connection extended to the exterior of the unit. 3. Comply with ARI 410. 4. Fabricate coil section to allow removal and replacement of coil for maintenance and to allow in-place access for service and maintenance of coil(s). 5. Coils shall not act as structural component of unit. 6. Coil frame shall be of stainless steel construction. 2.5 AIR FILTRATION SECTION A. General Requirements for Air Filtration Section: 1. Comply with NFPA 90A. 2. Provide minimum arrestance according to ASHRAE 52.1, and a minimum efficiency reporting value (MERV) according to ASHRAE 52.2. 3. Provide filter holding frames arranged for flat or angular orientation, with access doors on both sides of unit.  Filters shall be removable from one side or lifted out from access plenum. B. Filter Gage: 1. 2-inch-(50-mm-) diameter, diaphragm-actuated dial in metal case. 2. Vent valves. 3. Black figures on white background. 4. Front recalibration adjustment. 5. 2 percent of full-scale accuracy. 6. Range: 0-to 2.0-inch wg (0 to 500 Pa) C. Accessories:  Static-pressure tips with integral compression fittings, 1/4-inch (6-mm) aluminum tubing, and 2-or 3-way vent valves. D. Combination Filter and Mixing Section: 1. Cabinet support members shall hold 2-inch and 4-inch thick, pleated with 1” headers, flat, throwaway filters. 2.6 DAMPERS A. To be provided by others. No dampers are to be provided in the air handlers. 2.7 VARIABLE FREQUENCY DRIVES A. General Requirements for VFDs 1.Factory-supplied VFDs are programmed and started up from the factory and qualify the VFD, for a 24-month warranty from date of commissioning or 30 months from date of sale, whichever occurs first. 2.The VFD parameters are programmed into the controller and removable keypad. In the event that the VFD fails and needs replacement, the program can then be uploaded to the replacement VFD via the original keypad. 3.The VFD package as specified herein shall be enclosed in a UL Listed type enclosure, exceeding NEMA enclosure design criteria (enclosures with only NEMA ratings are not acceptable), completely assembled and tested by the manufacturer in an ISO 9001 facility. The VFD tolerated voltage window shall allow the VFD to operate from a line of +30% nominal, and –35% nominal voltage as a minimum. 4.Environmental operating conditions: VFDs shall be capable of continuous operation at – 15 to 40 C (5 to 104 F) ambient temperature with no frost allowed as per VFD manufacturers documented/submittal data or VFD must be oversized to meet these temperature requirements. Not acceptable are VFDs that can only operate at 40 C intermittently (average during a 24-hour period) and therefore, must be oversized. VFDs shall be capable of operating at altitude 0 to 3300 ft above sea level and less than 95% humidity, non-condensing. All circuit boards shall have conformal coating. 5.Enclosure shall be rated UL Type 1 and shall be UL listed as a plenum rated VFD. VFDs without these ratings are not acceptable. Type 1 enclosures with only NEMA rating are not acceptable (must be UL Type 1). 6.All VFDs shall have the following standard features: 7.All VFDs shall have the same customer interface, including digital display, and keypad, regardless of horsepower rating. The keypad shall be removable, capable of remote mounting and allow for uploading and downloading of parameter settings as an aid for start-up of multiple VFDs. 8.The keypad shall include Hand-Off-Auto selections and manual speed control. The drive shall incorporate “bumpless transfer” of speed reference when switching between “Hand” and “Auto” modes. There shall be fault reset and “Help” buttons on the keypad. The Help button shall include “on-line” assistance for programming and troubleshooting. 9.There shall be a built-in timeclock in the VFD keypad. The clock shall have a battery back-up with 10 years minimum life span. The clock shall be used to date and time stamp faults and record operating parameters at the time of fault. If the battery fails, the VFD shall automatically revert to hours of operation since initial power up. Capacitor back-up is not acceptable. The clock shall also be programmable to control start/stop functions, constant speeds, PID parameter sets and output Form-C relays. The VFD shall have a digital input that allows an override to the timeclock (when in the off mode) for a programmable time frame. There shall be four (4) separate, independent timer functions that have both weekday and weekend settings. 10. The VFDs shall utilize pre-programmed application macros specifically designed to facilitate start-up. The application macros shall provide one command to reprogram all parameters and customer interfaces for a particular application to reduce programming time. The VFD shall have two user macros to allow the end-user to create and save custom settings. 11. The VFD shall have cooling fans that are designed for easy replacement. The fans shall be designed for replacement without requiring removing the VFD from the wall or removal of circuit boards. The VFD cooling fans shall operate only when required. To extend the fan and bearing operating life, the VFD shall cycle the cooling fans on and off as required. 12. The VFD shall be capable of starting into a coasting load (forward or reverse) up to full speed and accelerate or decelerate to set point without tripping or component damage (flying start). 13. The VFD shall have the ability to automatically restart after an overcurrent, over-voltage, under-voltage, or loss of input signal protective trip. The number of restart attempts, trial time, and time between attempts shall be programmable. 14. The overload rating of the drive shall be 110% of its normal duty current rating for 1 minute every 10 minutes, 130% overload for 2 seconds. The minimum FLA rating shall meet or exceed the values in the NEC/UL table 430.250 for 4-pole motors. 15. The VFD shall have internal 5% impedance reactors to reduce the harmonics to the power line and to add protection from AC line transients. The 5% impedance may be from dual (positive and negative DC bus) reactors, or 5% AC line reactors. VFDs with only one DC reactor shall add an AC line reactor. 16. The input current rating of the VFD shall be no more than 3% greater than the output current rating. VFDs with higher input current ratings require the upstream wiring, protection devices, and source transformers to be oversized per NEC 430.120. Input and output current ratings must be shown on the VFD nameplate. 17. The VFD shall include a coordinated AC transient surge protection system consisting of 4 to 120 joule rated MOVs (phase to phase and phase to ground), a capacitor clamp, and 5% impedance reactors. 18. The VFD shall provide a programmable loss-of-load (broken belt/broken coupling) Form-C relay output. The drive shall be programmable to signal the loss-of-load condition via a keypad warning, Form-C relay output, and/or over the serial communications bus. The loss-of-load condition sensing algorithm shall include a programmable time delay that will allow for motor acceleration from zero speed without signaling a false loss-of-load condition. 19. The VFD shall have user programmable underload and overload curve functions to allow user defined indications of broken belt or mechanical failure/jam condition causing motor overload 20. The VFD shall include multiple “two zone” PID algorithms that allow the VFD to maintain PID control from two separate feedback signals (4 to 20mA, 0 to 10V, and/or serial communications). The two zone control PID algorithm will control motor speed based on a minimum, maximum, or average of the two feedback signals. All of the VFD PID controllers shall include the ability for “two zone” control. 21. If the input reference (4 to 20mA or 2 to 10V) is lost, the VFD shall give the user the option of either (1) stopping and displaying a fault, (2) running at a programmable preset speed, (3) hold the VFD speed based on the last good reference received, or (4) cause a warning to be issued, as selected by the user. The drive shall be programmable to signal this condition via a keypad warning, Form-C relay output and/or over the serial communication bus. 22. The VFD shall have programmable “Sleep” and “Wake up” functions to allow the drive to be started and stopped from the level of a process feedback signal. a. All VFDs to have the following adjustments: b. Three (3) programmable critical frequency lockout ranges to prevent the VFD from operating the load continuously at an unstable speed. The lockout range must be fully adjustable, from 0 to full speed. c. Two (2) PID set point controllers shall be standard in the drive, allowing pressure or flow signals to be connected to the VFD, using the microprocessor in the VFD for the closed-loop control. The VFD shall have 250 mA of 24 VDC auxiliary power and be capable of loop powering a transmitter supplied by others. The PID set point shall be adjustable from the VFD keypad, analog inputs, or over the communications bus. There shall be two independent parameter sets for the PID controller and the capability to switch between the parameter sets via a digital input, serial communications or from the keypad. The independent parameter sets are typically used for night setback, switching between summer and winter set points, etc. d. There shall be an independent, second PID loop that can utilize the second analog input and modulate one of the analog outputs to maintain the set point of an independent process (i.e.. valves, dampers, etc.). All set points, process variables, etc. to be accessible from the serial communication network. e. Two (2) programmable analog inputs shall accept current or voltage signals. f. Two (2) programmable analog outputs (0 to 20 mA or 4 to 20 mA). The outputs may be programmed to output proportional to Frequency, Motor Speed, Output Voltage, Output Current, Motor Torque, Motor Power (kW), DC Bus voltage, Active Reference, Active Feedback, and other data. g. Six (6) programmable digital inputs for maximum flexibility in interfacing with external devices. All digital inputs shall be programmable to initiate upon an application or removal of 24 VDC or 24 VAC. h. Three (3) programmable, digital Form-C relay outputs. The relay outputs shall include programmable on and off delay times and adjustable hysteresis. The relays shall be rated for maximum switching current 8 amps at 24 VDC and 0.4 A at 250 VAC; Maximum voltage 300 VDC and 250 VAC; continuous current rating of 2 amps RMS. Outputs shall be true Form-C type contacts; open collector outputs are not acceptable. i. Run permissive circuit: There shall be a run permissive circuit for damper or valve control. Regardless of the source of a run command (keypad, input contact closure, time-clock control, or serial communications), the VFD shall provide a dry contact closure that will signal the damper to open (VFD motor does not operate). When the damper is fully open, a normally open dry contact (end-switch) shall close. The closed end-switch is wired to a VFD digital input and allows VFD motor operation. Two separate safety interlock inputs shall be provided. When either safety is opened, the motor shall be commanded to coast to stop and the damper shall be commanded to close. The keypad shall display “start enable 1 (or 2) missing”. The safety input status shall also be transmitted over the serial communications bus. j. The VFD control shall include a programmable time delay for VFD start and a keypad indication that this time delay is active. A Form C relay output provides a contact closure to signal the VAV boxes open. This will allow VAV boxes to be driven open before the motor operates. The time delay shall be field programmable from 0 to 120 seconds. Start delay shall be active regardless of the start command source (keypad command, input contact closure, time-clock control, or serial communications). k. Seven (7) programmable preset speeds. l. Two independently adjustable accelerate and decelerate ramps with 1 to 1800 seconds adjustable time ramps. m. The VFD shall include a motor flux optimization circuit that will automatically reduce applied motor voltage to the motor to optimize energy consumption and reduce audible motor noise. The VFD shall have selectable software for optimization of motor noise, energy consumption, and motor speed control. n. The VFD shall include a carrier frequency control circuit that reduces the carrier frequency based on actual VFD temperature that allows higher carrier frequency settings without derating the VFD. o. The VFD shall include password protection against parameter changes. p. The keypad shall include a backlit LCD display. The display shall be in complete English words for programming and fault diagnostics (alpha-numeric codes are not acceptable). All VFD faults shall be displayed in English words. The keypad shall include a minimum of 14 assistants including: q. All applicable operating values shall be capable of being displayed in engineering (user) units. A minimum of three operating values from the list below shall be capable of being displayed at all times. The display shall be in complete English words (alpha-numeric codes are not acceptable): r. Output Frequency s. Motor Speed (RPM, %, or Engineering units) t. Motor Current u. Motor Torque v. Motor Power (kW) w. DC Bus Voltage x. Output Voltage y. The VFD shall include a fireman’s override input. Upon receipt of a contact closure from the fire / smoke control station, the VFD shall operate in one of two modes: 1) Operate at a programmed predetermined fixed speed ranging from – 500 Hz (reverse) to 500 Hz (forward). 2) Operate in a specific fireman’s override PID algorithm that automatically adjusts motor speed based on override set point and feedback. The mode shall override all other inputs (analog/digital, serial communication, and all keypad commands), except customer defined safety run interlocks, and force the motor to run in one of the two modes above. “Override Mode” shall be displayed on the keypad. Upon removal of the override signal, the VFD shall resume normal operation, without the need to cycle the normal digital input run command. 23. Serial Communications: a. The VFD shall have an EIA-485 port as standard. The standard protocols shall be Modbus, Johnson Controls N2, Siemens Building Technologies FLN, and BACnet*. [Optional protocols for LonWorks†, Profibus, EtherNet, BACnet IP, and DeviceNet shall be available.] Each individual drive shall have the protocol in the base VFD. The use of third party gateways and multiplexers is not acceptable. All protocols shall be “certified” by the governing authority (i.e., BTL Listing for BACnet). Use of non-certified protocols is not allowed. b. The BACnet connection shall be an EIA-485, MS/TP interface operating at 9.6, 19.2, 38.4, or 76.8 Kbps. The connection shall be tested by the BACnet Testing Labs (BTL) and be BTL Listed. The BACnet interface shall conform to the BACnet standard device type of an Applications Specific Controller (B-ASC). The interface shall support all BIBBs defined by the BACnet standard profile for a B-ASC including, but not limited to: c. If additional hardware is required to obtain the BACnet interface, the VFD manufacturer shall supply one BACnet gateway per drive. Multiple VFDs sharing one gateway shall not be acceptable. d. Serial communication capabilities shall include, but not be limited to; run-stop control, speed set adjustment, proportional/integral/derivative PID control adjustments, current limit, accel/decel time adjustments, and lock and unlock the keypad. The drive shall have the capability of allowing the DDC to monitor feedback such as process variable feedback, output speed / frequency, current (in amps), % torque, power (kW), kilowatt hours (resettable), operating hours (resettable), and drive temperature. The DDC shall also be capable of monitoring the VFD relay output status, digital input status, and all analog input and analog output values. All diagnostic warning and fault information shall be transmitted over the serial communications bus. Remote VFD fault reset shall be possible. e. The VFD shall include an independent PID loop for customer use. The independent PID loop may be used for cooling tower bypass valve control, chilled water valve / hot water valve control, etc. Both the VFD PID control loop and the independent PID control loop shall continue functioning even if the serial communications connection is lost. As default, the VFD shall keep the last good set point command and last good DO and AO commands in memory in the event the serial communications connection is lost and continue controlling the process. f. EMI/RFI filters: All VFDs shall include EMI/RFI filters. The onboard filters shall allow the VFD assembly to be CE Marked and the VFD shall meet product standard EN 61800-3 for the First Environment restricted level with up to 100 feet of motor cable. No Exceptions. Certified test reports shall be provided with the submittals confirming compliance to EN 61800-3, First Environment. 24. All VFDs through 75 hp at 480 V shall be protected from input and output power mis-wiring. The VFD shall sense this condition and display an alarm on the keypad. The VFD shall not sustain damage from this power mis-wiring condition. B. Operational Functions: 1. The drive digital display shall be capable of displaying the following: Frequency, percent current, current amps, percent voltage I/O, voltage in volts I/O, RPM, GPM, I/O watts, torque, and input reference signal, kWh. 2. The drive shall have 320 programmable parameters which can be changed while the drive is operating. 3. The drive’s 353 parameters shall be adjustable from the 8-key touchpad or computer link. 4. The drive’s 8-key touchpad shall be NEMA 12 rated. 5. The drive’s keypad shall be capable of being extended 15 ft from the drive. C. Included Options: 1. VFD with Integral Disconnect: 2. UL listed by the drive manufacturer as a complete assembly. 3. UL 508 labeled . 4. Capable of being locked by three padlocks. 5. Minimum two-contactor by-pass to allow drive to be serviced and maintain operation of fans. 2.8 SOURCE QUALITY CONTROL A. Fan Sound-Power Level Ratings:  Comply with AMCA 301, "Methods for Calculating Fan Sound Ratings from Laboratory Test Data."  Test fans according to AMCA 300, "Reverberant Room Method for Sound Testing of Fans."  Fans shall bear AMCA-certified sound ratings seal. B. Fan Performance Rating:  Factory test fan performance for airflow, pressure, power, air density, rotation speed, and efficiency.  Rate performance according to AMCA 210, "Laboratory Methods of Testing Fans for Aerodynamic Performance Rating." C. Water Coils:  Factory tested to 300 psig (2070 kPa) according to ARI 410 and ASHRAE 33. D. Refrigerant Coils:  Factory tested to 450 psig (3105 kPa) according to ARI 410 and ASHRAE 33. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 DELIVERY A. Delivery to site (or District secured warehouse) shall be included in the bid price. B. Manufacturer will coordinate with construction manager or if available installing contractor selected under separate bid for delivery location, time, rigging requirements, etc. 3.2 INSTALLATION A. By Installing Contractor under separate bid. 3.3 STARTUP SERVICE A. Provide Factory startup service. B. Inspect field-assembled components, equipment installation, and piping and electrical connections for proper assemblies, installations, and connections. C. Prepare a written startup report that records result of tests and inspections. END OF SECTION 237313 