     Heat Exchanger Pre-Purchase Specification  Herald Towers Retail 50 West 34th Street New York, NY, 10001        SUBMITTED BY AMA Group 825 8th Avenue, FL 18 New York, NY, 10019   CONTACT Peter Harman Senior Associate PHarman@amagroupusa.com 212.404.5805     May 16, 2025 AMA Project No. J005-03-007    SECTION 23 57 00 – HEAT EXCHANGERS FOR HVAC PART 1 - GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. This Section includes plate heat exchangers. 1.3 SUBMITTALS A. Product Data:  Include rated capacities, operating characteristics, furnished specialties, and accessories. B. Shop Drawings:  Signed and sealed by a qualified professional engineer.  Detail equipment assemblies and indicate dimensions, weights, loads, required clearances, method of field assembly, components, and location and size of each field connection. 1. Design Calculations:  Calculate requirements for selecting seismic restraints and for designing bases. 2. Base Details:  Detail fabrication including anchorages and attachments to structure and to supported equipment. C. Coordination Drawings:  Equipment room, drawn to scale, on which the following items are shown and coordinated with each other, based on input from installers of the items involved: 1. Tube-removal space. 2. Structural members to which heat exchangers will be attached. D. Operation and Maintenance Data:  For heat exchangers to include in emergency, operation, and maintenance manuals. 1.4 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Product Options:  Drawings indicate size, profiles, performance, and dimensional requirements of heat exchangers and are based on the specific equipment indicated.  Refer to Division 01 Section "Product Requirements." B. ASME Compliance:  Fabricate and label heat exchangers to comply with ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code:  Section VIII, "Pressure Vessels," Division 1. 1.5 WARRANTY A. Special Warranty:  Manufacturer's standard form in which manufacturer agrees to repair or replace components of water heat exchanger that fail in materials or workmanship within specified period. 1. Heat Exchanger Warranty Period:  One year from date of Substantial Completion PART 2 - PRODUCTS 2.1 MANUFACTURERS A. In other Part 2 articles where titles below introduce lists, the following requirements apply to product selection: 1. Available Manufacturers:  Subject to compliance with requirements, manufacturers offering products that may be incorporated into the Work include, but are not limited to, manufacturers specified. 2.2 SHELL-AND-TUBE HEAT EXCHANGERS A. Description: Packaged assembly of tank, heat-exchanger coils, and specialties. B. Manufacturers: 1. ITT Industries; Bell & Gossett. 2. API Heat Transfer. 3. Diversified Heat Transfer. 4. Taco. C. Heat exchangers shall be U-tube type, with steam in the shell and water in the tubes, unless otherwise specifically noted on the drawings.  Shell shall be constructed of rolled steel or steel pipe of ample thickness for the specified pressure and temperature.  Tube sheets shall be heavy steel, accurately drilled for all tubes.  Head shall be cast iron or steel. D. Where straight-tube converters are required, approved provision for differential expansion shall be provided. E. Heating surfaces shall be composed of seamless 3/4 inch (19 mm) o.d. by 18 BWG copper, securely expanded into tube sheet at one end and properly supported at the other end. F. The heat exchanger shell shall be furnished with the following additional ITP couplings: 1. A 1-1/2 inch (38 mm) ITP coupling suitable for mounting the required pressure-relief valve. 2. A 1 inch (25 mm) ITP coupling suitable for mounting a vacuum breaker. G. Provide suitable saddles to support the heat exchanger, which in turn shall be resiliently mounted on structural supports designed to safely support the heat exchanger when filled with water.  Details of supports shall be submitted for approval prior to fabrication. 2.3 GASKETED PLATE HEAT EXCHANGERS A. Manufacturers: 1. ITT Industries; Bell & Gossett. 2. Alpha-Laval Thermal, Inc. 3. Polaris Plate Heat Exchangers. 4. Mueller, Paul Company. 5. API Heat Transfer Inc. B. Configuration:  Freestanding assembly consisting of frame support, top and bottom carrying and guide bars, fixed and movable end plates, tie rods, individually removable plates, and one-piece gaskets. C. Frame: 1. Frame shall be carbon steel of at least grade SA 516/70 or 60. Frame shall be sandblasted, coated with a zinc-rich primer, and finished with two coats of epoxy enamel.  The moveable cover shall be supported from the upper carry bar by means of a roller for unit’s 6” port and larger.  Frame covers shall be of sufficient thickness so as not to require the use of horizontal reinforcing bars.  Welded reinforcements or stiffeners are not permitted.  Connections equal to or less than 2” shall be stainless steel 316 L male NPT.  Connections equal or larger than 3” shall be 150 psig ANSI flange design.  Carrying and guiding bars design shall permit the removal or access to any plate in the plate pack without the need to remove any other plates.  Compression bolts shall be provided in material SA 193 B7 and coated with zinc plating.  The open bolt ends shall be covered with a plastic mesh. D. Top and Bottom Carrying and Guide Bars: Painted carbon steel, aluminum, or stainless steel. 1. Fabricate attachment of heat-exchanger carrying and guide bars with reinforcement strong enough to resist heat-exchanger movement during a seismic event when heat-exchanger carrying and guide bars are anchored to building structure. E. Plates: 1. Plates shall be embossed with a horizontal herring bone pattern in high or low thermal length design as required.  Plate material shall be AISI 304 or AISI 316 stainless steel. a. The inlet port area shall be design with sloping lead-in grooves so as to minimize pressure drop in that area. b. The plate shall be designed with an integral plate locking system.  The hanger area shall feature a locking lip, which engages the adjacent plate in order to ensure proper alignment. c. Absolutely no reinforcement shall be welded to the plates. d. All plates shall be pressed in a single-stage operation. e. Plate thickness shall be determined by the pressure rating and shall be indicated by the manufacturer on the submittals. F. Tie Rods and Nuts:  Steel or stainless steel. G. Plate Material:  0.40 mm, Alloy 304. H. Gasket: 1. Gaskets shall be molded one-piece design.  Gaskets shall be of a molded one-piece design with venting holes in the port areas to avoid cross-contamination.  The gasket material shall be NBR, EPDM, or Viton elastomer.  The gasketing system shall be glueless, with gaskets attached to the plates by means of integral clips or tabs. I. Piping Connections: 1. Furnish end-plate port with threaded studs suitable for flanged connection. 2. Line wetted surfaces with same material as plates. J. Testing: 1. After completion of assembly and before shipment, the heat exchanger shall be hydrostatically tested at 1.3 times the design pressure (in accordance with the requirements of ASME Section VIII, Division 1.)  The test shall be single-side, with the other side at atmospheric pressure. K. Capacity and Characteristics:  See equipment schedules on drawings for more information. PART 3 - EXECUTION 3.1 EXAMINATION A. Examine areas for compliance with requirements for installation tolerances and for structural rigidity, strength, anchors, and other conditions affecting performance of heat exchangers. 1. Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected. 3.2 CONNECTIONS A. Piping installation requirements are specified in other Division 23 Sections.  Drawings indicate general arrangement of piping, fittings, and specialties. B. Maintain manufacturer's recommended clearances for service and maintenance.  Install piping connections to allow service and maintenance of heat exchangers. C. Install shutoff valves at heat-exchanger inlet and outlet connections. D. Install relief valves on heat-exchanger heated-fluid connection and install pipe relief valves, full size of valve connection, to floor drain. 3.3 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Test and adjust controls and safeties.  Replace damaged and malfunctioning controls and equipment. 3.4 CLEANING A. After completing system installation, including outlet fitting and devices, inspect exposed finish.  Remove burrs, dirt, and construction debris and repair damaged finishes. 3.5 DEMONSTRATION A. Engage a factory-authorized service representative to train Owner's maintenance personnel to adjust, operate, and maintain heat exchangers.  Refer to Division 01 Section "Demonstration and Training." END OF SECTION 23 57 00 