      Hydronic Pump Pre-Purchase Specification  Herald Towers Retail 50 West 34th Street New York, NY, 10001        SUBMITTED BY AMA Group 825 8th Avenue, FL 18 New York, NY, 10019   CONTACT Peter Harman Senior Associate PHarman@amagroupusa.com 212.404.5805     May 16, 2025 AMA Project No. J005-03-007   SECTION 232123 - HYDRONIC PUMPS PART 1 - GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Section Includes: 1. Separately coupled, base-mounted, end-suction centrifugal pumps. 1.3 DEFINITIONS A. ECM: Electronically commutated motor. B. EPDM: Ethylene propylene diene monomer. C. EPR: Ethylene propylene rubber. D. FKM: Fluoroelastomer polymer. E. HI: Hydraulic Institute. F. NBR: Nitrile rubber or Buna-N. 1.4 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For each type of pump. 1. Include certified performance curves and rated capacities, operating characteristics, furnished specialties, final impeller dimensions, and accessories for each type of product indicated. 2. Indicate pump's operating point on curves. B. Shop Drawings: For each pump. 1. Show pump layout and connections. 2. Include setting drawings with templates for installing foundation and anchor bolts and other anchorages. 3. Include diagrams for power, signal, and control wiring. C. Delegated-Design Submittal: For each pump. 1. Design calculations and vibration isolation base details, signed and sealed by a qualified professional engineer. a. Design Calculations: Calculate requirements for selecting vibration isolators and for designing vibration isolation bases. b. Vibration Isolation Base Details: Detail fabrication, including anchorages and attachments to structure and to supported equipment. Include adjustable motor bases, rails, and frames for equipment mounting. 1.5 INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS A. Coordination Drawings: Plans, or BIM model, drawn to scale, showing the items described in this Section, and coordinated with all building trades. B. Field quality-control reports. 1.6 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Operation and Maintenance Data: For pumps to include in emergency, operation, and maintenance manuals. 1.7 MAINTENANCE MATERIAL SUBMITTALS A. Furnish extra materials that match products installed and that are packaged with protective covering for storage and identified with labels describing contents. 1. Mechanical Seals:  One mechanical seal(s) for each pump. PART 2 - PRODUCTS 2.1 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. B. Delegated Design: Engage a qualified professional engineer, as defined in Section 014000 "Quality Requirements," to design vibration isolation. 2.2 CLOSE-COUPLED, IN-LINE CENTRIFUGAL PUMPS A. Source Limitations: Obtain pumps from single source from single manufacturer. B. Description: Factory-assembled and -tested, centrifugal, overhung-impeller, close-coupled, in-line pump as defined in HI 1.1-1.2 and HI 1.3; designed for installation with pump and motor shafts mounted horizontally or vertically. C. Pump Construction: 1. Casing: Radially split, cast iron, with threaded gauge tappings at inlet and outlet, replaceable bronze wear rings, and threaded companion-flange connections. 2. Impeller: ASTM B584, cast bronze; statically and dynamically balanced, keyed to shaft, and secured with a locking cap screw. For constant-speed pumps, trim impeller to match specified performance. 3. Pump Shaft Sleeve:  Type 304 stainless steel. 4. Pump Stub Shaft:  Type 304 stainless steel. 5. Seal: Mechanical seal consisting of carbon rotating ring against a ceramic seat held by a stainless steel spring, and EPDM rubber bellows and gasket. Include water slinger on shaft between motor and seal. 6. Seal Flushing: Flush, cool, and lubricate pump seal by directing pump discharge water to flow over the seal. D. Shaft Coupling: Rigid, axially-split spacer coupling to allow service of pump seal without disturbing pump or motor. E. Motor: Comply with NEMA designation, temperature rating, service factor, and efficiency requirements for motors specified in Section 230513 "Common Motor Requirements for HVAC Equipment." 1. Enclosure :  Totally enclosed, fan cooled. 2. NEMA Premium Efficient motors as defined in NEMA MG 1. 3. Motor Sizes: Minimum size as indicated. If not indicated, large enough so driven load will not require motor to operate in service factor range above 1.0. 4. Controllers, Electrical Devices, and Wiring: Comply with requirements for electrical devices and connections specified in electrical Sections. 5. Variable-speed motor. 6. Provide integral pump motor variable-speed controller. 2.3 SEPARATELY COUPLED, BASE-MOUNTED, END-SUCTION CENTRIFUGAL PUMPS A. Source Limitations: Obtain pumps from single source from single manufacturer. B. Description: Factory-assembled and -tested, centrifugal, overhung-impeller, separately coupled, in-line pump as defined in HI 1.1-1.2 and HI 1.3; designed for installation with pump and motor shafts mounted vertically. C. Pump Construction:  1. Casing: Radially split, cast iron, with threaded gauge tappings at inlet and outlet, drain plug at bottom and air vent at top of volute, and flanged connections.  Provide integral mount on volute to support the casing, and provide attached piping to allow removal and replacement of impeller without disconnecting piping or requiring realignment of pump and motor shaft. 2. Impeller: ASTM B584, cast bronze; statically and dynamically balanced, keyed to shaft, and secured with a locking cap screw. For pumps that are not frequency-drive controlled, trim impeller to match specified performance. 3. Pump Shaft: Carbon steel, with copper-alloy shaft sleeve. 4. Seal, Mechanical Type: Mechanical seal consisting of carbon rotating ring against a ceramic seat held by a stainless steel spring, and EPDM bellows and gasket. 5. Seal, Packing Type: Packing seal consisting of stuffing box with a minimum of four rings of graphite-impregnated braided yarn with bronze lantern ring between center two graphite rings, and bronze packing gland. 6. Pump Bearings: Grease-lubricated ball bearings in cast-iron housing with grease fittings. D. Shaft Coupling: Molded-rubber insert and interlocking spider capable of absorbing vibration.  E. Coupling Guard: Dual rated; ANSI B15.1, Section 8; OSHA 1910.219 approved; steel; removable; attached to mounting frame. F. Mounting Frame: Welded-steel frame and cross members, factory fabricated from ASTM A36/A36M channels and angles. Fabricate to mount pump casing, coupling guard, and motor. G. Motor: Comply with NEMA designation, temperature rating, service factor, and efficiency requirements for motors specified in Section 230513 "Common Motor Requirements for HVAC Equipment."  1. Enclosure: Totally enclosed, fan cooled. 2. NEMA Premium Efficient motors as defined in NEMA MG 1. 3. Motor Sizes: Minimum size as indicated. If not indicated, large enough so driven load will not require motor to operate in service factor range above 1.0. 4. Controllers, Electrical Devices, and Wiring: Comply with requirements for electrical devices and connections specified in electrical Sections. 5. Variable-speed motor. 6. Provide integral pump motor variable-speed controller.  2.4 PUMP SPECIALTY FITTINGS A. Suction Diffuser: 1. Angle pattern. 2. 175-psig pressure rating, cast-iron body and end cap, pump-inlet fitting. 3. Bronze 16-mesh wire startup and Type 304 stainless steel permanent strainers with 3/16-inch. 4. Type 304 stainless steel straightening vanes. 5. Drain plug. 6. Factory-fabricated support. B. Triple-Duty Valve: 1. Angle or straight pattern. 2. 175-psig pressure rating, cast-iron body, pump-discharge fitting. 3. Valve with multi-turn stem and memory stop to allow valve to be returned to its original position after shutoff. 4. Brass valve disc with EPDM rubber seat. 5. Type 304 stainless steel valve stem. 6. Drain plug and bronze-fitted shutoff, balancing, and check valve features. 7. Brass gauge ports with integral check valve and orifice for flow measurement. 2.5 INTEGRAL PUMP MOTOR VARIABLE-SPEED CONTROLLERS A. Where specified or scheduled, provide pumps with an integral pump motor speed controller. 1. Motor: Operates as constant- or variable-speed pump with speed regulated by an integrated variable-speed drive. 2. Integrated Pump Controller: Supports direct communication with the building management system (BMS) with built-in support for the following protocols:  Modbus RTU, BACnet? MS/TP, Metasys N2. 3. Commissioning and pump set up access to pump controls via the following: a. A web interface (data exchange). b. A user interface located on the face of speed controller to adjust modes and mode values. c. An electronic display that reads real-time mode set values, flow, head, speed, and power and that locks out unauthorized adjustment of pump. 4. Provide electronics with "Auto" as factory default but slope of the proportional curve will automatically match the required system curve, constant pressure control (delta-p/c), variable differential pressure control (delta-p/v), constant curve duty (uncontrolled pump), and rpm regulation. RPM (speed) regulation can be accomplished by the following: a. Manual (via user interface or HTML). b. Remote via 0 to 10 V dc. c. Data protocol communications with the BMS. 5. Pump Electronics: Standard with multiple digital inputs and one external digital output to be available for additional mechanical room control and pump status monitoring. 6. Controller: Mounted on or adjacent to the motor. Provide enclosure rated to UL Type 12. 7. Electronically Protected Pumps: Rated for continuous duty and with built-in startup circuit. Provide overcurrent, line surge and current limit protection, thermal monitoring, heat sink status and over temperature protection. 8. Pump capable of being monitored continuously via integrated Internet link. 9. Integrated pump controller system to have the following features: a. Controller software shall be capable of sensorless control in variable-volume systems without need for pump-mounted (internal/external) or remotely mounted differential pressure sensor. b. Integrated Pump Controller Sensorless Control: Operates under Quadratic Pressure Control (QPC) to ensure that head reduction with reducing flow conforms to quadratic control curve. c. Controller: 1) Minimum head of 40 percent of design duty head. 2) User-adjustable control mode settings and minimum/maximum head set points using built-in programming interface. d. Controller Integrated Control Software: 1) Capable of controlling pump performance for non-overloading power at every point of operation. 2) Capable of maintaining flow rate data. 2.6 ELECTRONICALLY COMMUTATED MOTOR (ECM) A. Provide pumps so they are specified or scheduled with ECM. 1. Synchronous, constant torque, ECM with permanent magnet rotor. Rotor magnets to be time-stable, nontoxic ceramic magnets (Sr-Fe). 2. Driven by a frequency converter with an integrated power factor correction filter. Conventional induction motors will not be acceptable. 3. Each motor with an integrated variable-frequency drive, tested as one unit by manufacturer. 4. Motor speed adjustable over full range from 0 rpm to maximum scheduled speed. 5. Variable motor speed to be controlled by a 0- to 10 V-dc or 4- to 20-mA input. 6. Integrated motor protection verified by UL to protect the pump against over-/undervoltage, overtemperature of motor and/or electronics, overcurrent, locked rotor, and dry run (no-load condition). PART 3 - EXECUTION 3.1 EXAMINATION A. Examine equipment foundations and anchor-bolt locations for compliance with requirements for installation tolerances and other conditions affecting performance of the Work. B. Examine roughing-in for piping systems to verify actual locations of piping connections before pump installation. C. Examine foundations and inertia bases for suitable conditions where pumps will be installed. D. Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected. 3.2 PUMP INSTALLATION A. Install pumps to provide access for periodic maintenance including removing motors, impellers, couplings, and accessories. B. Independently support pumps and piping so weight of piping is not supported by pumps and weight of pumps is not supported by piping. C. Automatic Condensate Pump Units: Install units for collecting condensate and extend to open drain. D. Equipment Mounting: 1. Comply with requirements for vibration isolation devices specified in Section 230548.13 "Vibration Controls for HVAC." E. Equipment Mounting: Install in-line pumps with continuous-thread hanger rods and spring hangers with vertical-limit stop of size required to support weight of in-line pumps. 1. Comply with requirements for seismic-restraint devices specified in Section 230548 "Vibration and Seismic Controls for HVAC." 2. Comply with requirements for hangers and supports specified in Section 230529 "Hangers and Supports for HVAC Piping and Equipment." 3.3 ALIGNMENT A. Engage a factory-authorized service representative to perform alignment service. B. Comply with requirements in HI standards for alignment of pump and motor shaft. Add shims to the motor feet and bolt motor to base frame. Do not use grout between motor feet and base frame. C. Comply with pump and coupling manufacturers' written instructions. D. After alignment is correct, tighten foundation bolts evenly but not too firmly. Completely fill baseplate with nonshrink, nonmetallic grout while metal blocks and shims or wedges are in place. After grout has cured, fully tighten foundation bolts. 3.4 ELECTRICAL CONNECTIONS A. Connect wiring in accordance with Section 260519 "Low-Voltage Electrical Power Conductors and Cables." B. Ground equipment in accordance with Section 260526 "Grounding and Bonding for Electrical Systems." C. Install electrical devices furnished by manufacturer, but not factory mounted, in accordance with NFPA 70 and NECA 1. D. Install nameplate for each electrical connection, indicating electrical equipment designation and circuit number feeding connection. 1. Nameplate shall be laminated acrylic or melamine plastic signs, as specified in Section 260553 "Identification for Electrical Systems." 3.5 CONTROL CONNECTIONS A. Install control and electrical power wiring to field-mounted control devices. B. Connect control wiring in accordance with Section 260523 "Control-Voltage Electrical Power Cables." 3.6 STARTUP SERVICE A. Engage a factory-authorized service representative to perform startup service. 1. Complete installation and startup checks in accordance with manufacturer's written instructions. 2. Check piping connections for tightness. 3. Clean strainers on suction piping. Use startup strainer for initial startup. 4. Perform the following startup checks for each pump before starting: a. Verify bearing lubrication. b. Verify that pump is free to rotate by hand and that pump for handling hot liquid is free to rotate with pump hot and cold. If pump is bound or drags, do not operate until cause of trouble is determined and corrected. c. Verify that pump is rotating in correct direction. 5. Prime pump by opening suction valves and closing drains and prepare pump for operation. 6. Start motor. 7. Open discharge valve slowly. 3.7 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Testing Agency:  Owner will engage a qualified testing agency to perform tests and inspections. B. Manufacturer's Field Service: Engage a factory-authorized service representative to test and inspect components, assemblies, and equipment installations, including connections. C. Perform tests and inspections with the assistance of a factory-authorized service representative. D. Hydronic pumps will be considered defective if they do not pass tests and inspections. E. Prepare test and inspection reports. 3.8 DEMONSTRATION A. Engage a factory-authorized service representative to train Owner's maintenance personnel to adjust, operate, and maintain hydronic pumps. END OF SECTION 232123 