      Cooling Towers Pre-Purchase Specification  Herald Towers Retail 50 West 34th Street New York, NY, 10001        SUBMITTED BY AMA Group 825 8th Avenue, FL 18 New York, NY, 10019   CONTACT Peter Harman Senior Associate PHarman@amagroupusa.com 212.404.5805     May 16, 2025 AMA Project No. J005-03-007    PART 1 GENERAL 1.01 SECTION INCLUDES A. Open circuit, forced draft, counterflow cooling towers. 1.02 REFERENCE STANDARDS A. ASHRAE 90.1-2019 – Energy Standard for Buildings Except Low-Rise Residential Buildings. B. ASTM A123/A123M - Standard Specification for Zinc (Hot-Dip Galvanized) Coatings on Iron and Steel Products 2017. C. ASTM A653/A653M - Standard Specification for Steel Sheet, Zinc-Coated (Galvanized) or Zinc-Iron Alloy-Coated (Galvannealed) by the Hot-Dip Process 2018. D. ASTM B117 - Standard Practice for Operating Salt Spray (Fog) Apparatus 2018. E. ASTM E84 - Standard Test Method for Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials 2018b. F. ASTM D2794 - Standard Test Method for Resistance of Organic Coatings to the Effects of Rapid Deformation (Impact). G. CTI STD-201 OM - Operations Manual for Thermal Performance Certification of Evaporative Heat Rejection Equipment 2017. H. CTI STD-201 RS - Performance Rating of Evaporative Heat Rejection Equipment 2017. I. ISO 9001 - Quality management systems -- Requirements 2015. J. NEMA MG 1 - Motors and Generators 2017. K. ASCE/SEI 7 - Minimum Design Loads and Associated Criteria for Buildings and Other Structures. 1.03 SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: Provide rated capacities, dimensions, weights and point loadings, accessories, required clearances, electrical requirements and wiring diagrams, and location and size of field connections.  B. Shop Drawings: Indicate suggested structural steel supports including dimensions, sizes, and locations for mounting bolt holes. C. Manufacturer's Certificate: Certify that cooling tower performance, based on CTI STD-201 meets or exceeds specified requirements and submit performance curve plotting leaving water temperature against wet bulb temperature. D. Manufacturer's Instructions: Submit manufacturer's complete installation instructions. E. Operation and Maintenance Data: Include start-up instructions, maintenance data, parts lists, controls, and accessories. F. Warranty: Submit manufacturer's warranty and ensure forms have been filled out in Owner’s name and registered with manufacturer. 1.04 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Manufacturer Qualifications:  Company specializing in manufacturing the type of products specified in this section, with minimum 20 years of documented experience and ISO 9001 certification. B. Installer Qualifications: Company specializing in performing the type of work specified in this section with minimum 20 years of experience and approved by manufacturer. C. Product Performance:  1. Cooling tower must have a minimum energy rating of [_____] per ASHRAE 90.1, 189 and CA Title 24. 1.05 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Equipment will be factory-assembled, including cold water basin, heat transfer section, water distribution, fan drive system, and casing panels. For shipping, disassemble into as large as practical sub-assemblies to minimize field work for re-assembly.  B. Comply with manufacturer's installation instructions for rigging, unloading, and transporting units. 1.06 WARRANTY A. One-year warranty after start up, or eighteen months from date of shipment, whichever occurs first. Warranty to include coverage for defects in material and workmanship. B. Fans, fan shafts, bearings, sheaves, gearboxes, drive shafts, couplings, and mechanical equipment support must be warranted against defects in materials and workmanship for a period of five (5) years or seven (7) years, if motor space heater is properly wired. PART 2 PRODUCTS 2.01 MANUFACTURERS A. Open Circuit, Forced Draft, Counterflow Cooling Towers: 1. Basis of Design: Baltimore Aircoil Company; Series V (VT0, VT1, and VTL): www.baltimoreaircoil.com #BAC 2. EVAPCO, Inc. 3. Marley Cooling Technologies; SPX Cooling Technologies 2.02 MANUFACTURED UNITS A. Provide units for indoor or outdoor use, factory-assembled, vertical discharge, forced draft design, with fan assemblies built into or beside the casing. ------PROVIDE ALTERNATE: B. Provide units suited for outdoor use, induced draft with vertical discharge of air. Units will be shipped disassembled in protective crates. Crates and components must be clearly labeled with part numbers. Assembly of units will be completed onsite. Cold water basins will not have welded seams when shipped knocked down.   2.03 COMPONENTS A. Cold Water Basin: 1. Heavy-gage G-235 (Z700) galvanized steel with all edges given a protective coating of zinc-rich compound. Basin will include large area lift out strainers with perforated openings sized smaller than the water distribution system nozzles and an anti-votexing device to prevent air entrainment. The strainer and anti-vortexing device will be constructed of the same material as the basin to prevent dissimilar metal corrosion. Provide drain/clean-out connection. B. Casing Panels and Framework: ----- Thermosetting Hybrid Polymer Coated Steel----- 1. Galvanized steel protected by a thermosetting hybrid polymer. The polymer to consist of G-235 (Z700 metric) hot-dip galvanized steel prepared in a four-step (clean, pre-treat, rinse, and dry) process with an electrostatically applied, thermosetting, hybrid polymer fuse-bonded to the substrate during a thermally activated curing stage and monitored by a 23-step quality assurance program. Other coatings must be submitted to the engineer for pre-approval. Approved equals must have undergone testing, resulting in the following results as a minimum: a. When X-scribed to the steel substrate, unit to withstand 6000 hours of 5 percent salt spray per ASTM B117 without blistering, chipping, or loss of adhesion. b. When X-scribed to the steel substrate, unit to withstand 6000 hours of exposure to acidic (pH=4.0) and alkaline (pH=11.0) water solutions at 95 degrees F (35 degrees C) without signs of chemical attack. c. Unit to withstand impact of 160 in-lbs per ASTM D2794 without fracture or delamination of the polymer layer. d. Unit to withstand 6000 hours of ultraviolet radiation equivalent to 120,000 hours of noontime sun exposure without loss of functional properties. e. Unit to withstand 200 thermal shock cycles between minus 25 degrees F and 180 degrees F (minus 32 degrees C and 82 degrees C) without loss of adhesion or other deterioration. f. Unit to withstand 6000 hours of exposure to 60 psi (42,184 kg/m^2) water jet without signs of wear or erosion. g. Type 304 stainless steel may be supplied as an equal to eliminate the need for passivation, minimize maintenance requirements, and prolong equipment life. C. Fans:  Forward curved centrifugal type mounted on steel shaft, with belt drive, bearings with ABMA STD 9 or ABMA STD 11 L-10 life at 40,000 hours, with extended grease fittings. D. Motors and Drives: 1. Motor: Single speed (1800 rpm), totally enclosed fan cooled (TEFC), cooling tower duty, inverter-duty type designed per NEMA Standard MG1, Section IV, Part 31. Motor will be located on a heavy-duty motor base, adjustable by a single threaded bolt-and-nut arrangement.  2. Fan Drive System: Belt Drive designed for minimum 150 percent motor nameplate power. Removable steel screens or panels protect the fan drive and all moving parts. E. Distribution Section: Polyvinyl chloride piping header and branches with non-clog ABS plastic spray nozzles. The branches and spray nozzles will be held in place by snap-in rubber grommets, allowing quick removal of individual nozzles or complete branches for cleaning or flushing. F. Fill: Stainless steel. The fill will be manufactured and performance tested by the cooling tower manufacturer to assure single source responsibility and control of the final product. G. Drift Eliminators: Three-pass design to minimize drift loss, made of PVC material.  H. Basin Water Level Control:  1. Electric water level control with NEMA 4 enclosure, solid state controls, LED status light, and stainless steel water level sensing electrodes. Number and position of probes provided to sense the following: high water level, low water level, high water alarm level, low water alarm level, heater safety cutout, and automatic solenoid valve. Include all necessary mounting hardware.  2.04 ACCESSORIES A. Circular access doors will be provided for easy access to the make-up water assembly and suction strainer for routine maintenance. B. Electric Immersion Heaters: In pan suitable to maintain temperature of water in pan at 40 degrees F (4.4 degrees C) when outside temperature is 0 degrees F (-17.7 degrees C) [OR -20 degrees F (-28.9 degrees C)] and wind velocity is 15 mph (25 kph); immersion thermostat and float control operate heaters on low temperature when the pan is filled. Heaters will be constructed of copper. C. Basin Sweeper Piping: The cold water basin of the cooling tower will be equipped with PVC sump sweeper piping with plastic eductor nozzles. The piping must be designed specifically for the size and shape of the basin to ensure full agitation.  D. Vibration Switch 1. Provide a mechanical local reset vibration switch. The mechanical vibration cutout switch will be guaranteed to trip at a point so as not to cause damage to the cooling tower. To ensure this, the trip point will be set in a frequency range of 0 to 3,600 RPM and a trip point of 0.2 to 2.0 g’s. PART 3 EXECUTION 3.01 INSTALLATION A. Install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. B. Provide the services of the manufacturer's field representative to supervise rigging, hoisting, and installation, allowing for minimum of one eight-hour day per tower. C. Install tower on structural steel beams as instructed by manufacturer. D. Connect condenser water piping to tower. Pitch condenser water supply to tower and condenser water suction away from tower.  E. Connect make-up water piping to tower. Pitch to tower.  F. Connect overflow and drain to acceptable discharge point as required by jurisdiction. 3.02 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. See Section Quality Requirements, for additional requirements. B. Provide the services of the manufacturer's field representative to inspect tower after installation and submit report prior to start-up, verifying installation is in accordance with specifications and manufacturer's recommendations. 3.03 SYSTEM STARTUP A. Start-up tower in presence of and instruct Owner 's operating personnel. END OF SECTION 