SECTION 26 00 09 ELECTRICAL PRE-PURCHASE REQUIREMENTS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SUMMARY A. Section includes: 1. Prepurchase general requirements and procedures. 2. List of equipment specifications and drawings for the material to be prepurchased. 3. All quotes and correspondence related to equipment and systems regarding the QTS Data Centers (QTS) project shall be directed to QTS Data Centers (QTS), designated as “owner” from this point forward. B. Technical proposal: 1. Submit with the bid a technical proposal of adequate depth and completeness to fully define the system offered. Include a separate description of all work required by others to make the offered system operational including electrical, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, controls, structural, rigging and other installation requirements. 2. Submit at time of bid any equipment or materials that have lead times that will affect the proposed schedule. Provide alternate costs to expedite delivery and manufacturing so that the proposed schedule can be accomplished. 3. Submit at time of bid, any proposed substitutions. List reasons the owner should accept substitutions including improved performance or equal performance and improved delivery time. Acceptance of substitutions is subject to acceptance by the Architect, whose decision will be final. A substitution is considered to be any manufacturer or product not specifically identified in the specifications or drawings. If only performance requirements are indicated, and no specific manufacturer is indicated, then a manufacturer meeting the contract document requirements is not considered a substitute. 4. Substitutions of specifically indicated items will be reviewed only if identified at time of bid, otherwise submittals will be returned rejected. It is the proposer’s responsibility to submit the first time, all information required to prove equality and a written letter on the proposer’s letterhead indicating that the item is in full compliance with the Contract Documents and will fit in the designated location. Include in bid, all costs for all trades for any work that may be required, including any architectural or engineering fees, to accommodate the substitution. Acceptance of the proposed substitution is up to the Architect and is not assured. Review will include, but is not limited to, quality, life cycle costs, size, appearance, construction, manufacturer, service record, efficiency, dependability, performance, etc. 5. Submit a list of references including telephone numbers and contact names of installations of similar nature and complexity 6. Submit a letter indicating that the system is as specified and indicated on the Drawings and that any and all exceptions are listed in this letter. 7. As a minimum the technical proposal shall include the following: a.  Description of the configuration and operation of the proposed system.  Including efficiencies at part and full load.  b.  Outline drawings of all proposed equipment in plan and elevation views  including overall dimensions, weights and clearances required.  c.  A complete copy of the specifications (Reduced in size to allow a Comment  Column), with each sub-paragraph noted with comment, “compliance,”  “deviation”, or “alternate”. In the case of non-primary, vendor-supplied items,  the name of the sub-vendor supplying said item, including model number  shall be indicated.  1) By noting the term “compliance”, it shall be understood that the  manufactures is in full compliance with the item specified and will  provide exactly the same with no deviations.  2) By noting the term “deviation” it shall be understood that the proposer  prefers to provide a different component that performs the same  function in lieu of that specified. Indicate all deviations and indicate  what is being proposed, with enough detail to determine equivalency.  3) By noting the term “alternate” it shall be understood that the proposer  proposes to provide the same operating function but prefers to do it in a  different manner. An alternate shall be fully described as to what the  proposer proposes to provide. Indicate any function or feature that is  not provided.  d.  The technical proposal shall include catalog cut sheets or other descriptive  material of major components.  e.  Items specifically called for in this specification are to provide for specific  performance and quality of components desired and shall not restrict any  proposer from furnishing an equivalent product for the performance and  operation intended as described above.  f.  A brief resume of a typical training program on similar systems.  g.  System delivery schedule with milestones indicated, including shop drawing  development and review time.  h.  A synopsis of like systems previously delivered and installed with names and  telephone numbers of design engineers or customer personnel for each  system.  i.  If there are two or more documented cases of operational problems and  failures of a similar system, the proposed manufacturer may be rejected.  j.  Statement of Warranty  k.  For equipment requiring utility company approval provide a letter from the  Utility Company stating that the proposed equipment may be acceptable  subject to final utility approval of shop drawings. Include manufacturer’s  signed statement indicating approval will be received from utility even if other  equipment must be substituted and will be accomplished in the time frame as  indicated in the specifications.  l.  Provide alternate costs indicated herein or in individual sections.  m.  Submit information on work required by others including, rigging information,  HVAC environmental requirements including air requirements and heat  rejection, control interfaces, permitting information (where applicable), etc.  n.  Where applicable provide Emissions and Noise Data.  o. Failure to comply with the above in exact detail will be sufficient cause to reject a proposal. p. Four copies of the bound technical proposal shall be submitted with the bid. C. Description of work: 1. Provide all labor, materials, tools, equipment and incidentals necessary to furnish and shop-test prepurchased equipment as specified herein and in the applicable sections. 2. The equipment shall be stored by the equipment manufacturer until needed (maximum of 30 days). The equipment manufacturer shall submit an alternate cost on a per month basis, for storing the equipment for an additional three 3. (3) month period, or longer as required, to meet construction schedules. 4. Deliver, store and handle products in accordance with the manufacturer's and NFPA 70B recommendations, using means and methods that will prevent damage, deterioration and loss, including theft. Continue to carry insurance coverage until the equipment is delivered to the site. 5. Deliver products to the site in the manufacturer's original sealed container or other packaging system, complete with labels and instructions for handling, storing, unpacking, protecting and installing. Coordinate shipping schedule to meet project schedule and installing Firm’s requirements. 6. With each shipment include a master list of all components indicating which are to be shipped separately or at a later date. 7. All equipment shall be shipped FOB jobsite to the following location: 14100 Park Vista Blvd, 8. Fort Worth, TX 76177The prepurchaser intends to assign the prepurchased equipment to the installing Firm. Provide the installing Firm with information, coordination, cooperation and obligations required under these specifications as directed by the prepurchaser. 9. The supplier of the equipment shall work with the Architect to finalize the sequence of operations, configurations, accessories and controls and shall include the costs of minor changes (less than 1% of bid cost) to be made during shop drawing review. D. Service and maintenance in addition to warranty requirements. 1. Provide alternate cost to provide a five-year Warranty starting at the time of owner acceptance. 2. Provide alternate cost to provide an on-going preventative maintenance and service contract including 4-hour emergency response. Submit detailed descriptive information for manufacturer’s recommended complete preventative maintenance program. Provide cost for one year and five year preventative maintenance contract. Include all manufacturer’s recommended services and intervals. Contracts to begin after acceptance of the complete system by the owner. The owner or his designated representative will execute contracts. 1.2 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Division 26 1. 26 24 13p Switchboards – Purchase 2. 26 26 00p Power Distribution Units -Purchase 3. 26 33 53p Static Uninterruptible Power Supply – Purchase B. Electrical Drawings 1. Single line Diagrams 1.3 COORDINATION A. Coordinate and provide shipping splits, (weight and size) that allow the equipment to be moved through the building to its final location. Review path through building for restriction. 1. The building has a loading dock that accepts trailer trucks. B. Coordinate shipping and job site arrival times with the installing Firm, starting with the date indicated in individual specification sections. Daily shipments shall not exceed installing Firm’s ability to accept deliveries at the jobsite. Provide 48 hour notice to the project superintendent prior to scheduled arrival at the site. C. Copies of all purchase orders shall be transmitted to the field construction office at least 48 hours prior to delivery as advanced notification of material shipments. In this way early shipments of materials can be received, identified, and controlled prior to issuance of material. 1.4 QUALIFICATIONS/QUALITY ASSURANCE A. The proposer shall indicate active service technicians, system integrators and spare parts stocking distributors that service the project site. Submit names, addresses, phone numbers, distance from the project site and length of time local company has been an active distributor, along with the bid. B. The manufacturer's catalog number and description is the basis of the design and establishes quality and performance required for this project. Manufacturers of generally compatible products are also listed. The first manufacturer/product listed is the one the design is based on. Other manufacturers shall verify that their products provide the same performance and features and fit in the same space. C. The description following a catalog number is basically to further identify the item but may also call for accessories, options, or modifications which are beyond the cataloged item. D. Proposed substitutes may be submitted to the Architect for review at the time of bid. Submit samples when requested. The Architect decision as to whether the submitted equipment is acceptable shall be final and binding. 1.5 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS A. Provide products listed and classified by an OSHA certified Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory (NRTL) as suitable for purpose specified and indicated. Provide NRTL-listed material and equipment where standards are available. Notify Architect of any material or equipment that is not NRTL listed when submitting information. B. Perform work in strict accordance with the rules, regulations, listing or labeling requirements, standards, codes, ordinances, and laws of local, state, and Federal governments, and other authorities having legal jurisdiction over the site. No additional compensation shall be granted for work that must be changed as a result of the work not originally complying with the codes, standards, local requirements, etc. C. Equipment and installation shall be suitable for the wind, snow, ice, flood, and earthquake requirements indicated in the Building Code and ASCE 7 for the location and usage. 1. Building occupancy classification per ASCE 7 – category II 2. Spectral Acceleration Parameters: a. SS = 0.098g b. S1 = 0.051g 3. Seismic Design Category: A 4. Site Class as defined in the IBC: C 5. Component importance factor is 1.0 6. Wind Load = 125 MPH 7. Snow Load = 5 PSF D. All materials and equipment furnished shall comply with the latest edition of the applicable standards of the following authorities, except where the contract documents prescribe more rigorous qualifications, these documents shall govern: 1. Local codes and ordinances for the location of the project 2. UL -Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. 3. NEMA -National Electrical Manufacturers' Association. 4. IEEE -Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers. 5. ASHRAE -American Society of Heating, Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Engineers. 6. ASME -American Society of Mechanical Engineers. 7. ASTM -American Society for Testing Materials. 8. ANSI -American National Standards Institute. 9. NBFU -National Board of Fire Underwriters. 10. NEC -National Electrical Code. (ANSI/NFPA 70) 11. ICEA -Insulated Cable Engineers' Association. 12. FM -Factory Mutual. 13. OSHA -Occupational Safety and Health Act.NFPA -National Fire Protection Agency. 14. EPA – Environmental Protection Agency 15. NETA – National Electrical Testing Association 16. IBC -International Building Code 17. EPAct 05 -Energy Policy Act of 2005 E. Nothing in these documents shall be construed to permit work not conforming with these codes, ordinances and standards. When conflicts occur among the codes, ordinances, standards, drawings or specifications, the more restrictive requirements shall govern. F. The drawings and specifications do not undertake to repeat requirements written in the above codes, ordinances and standards 1.6 SUBMITTALS A. Submit complete shop drawings for all prepurchased equipment include specific shop drawing submittal requirements listed herein and in each section. B. Submit newly prepared information, drawn to accurate scale. Highlight, encircle, or otherwise indicate deviations from the Contract Documents. Do not reproduce Contract Documents or copy standard information as the basis of Shop Drawings. Standard information prepared without specific reference to the Project is not considered Shop Drawings. C. Shop Drawings shall include fabrication and installation drawings, setting diagrams, schedules, patterns, templates and similar drawings. Include the following information: 1. Dimensions and weights. 2. Identification of products and materials of construction of all items. 3. Compliance with applicable standards. 4. Notation of coordination requirements. 5. Notation of dimensions established by field measurement. 6. Efficiencies at Part and Full load. D. Collect Product Data into a single submittal for each element of construction or system. Product Data includes printed information such as manufacturer's installation instructions, catalog cuts, standard color charts, roughing-in diagrams and templates, standard wiring diagrams and performance curves. 1. Mark each copy to show applicable choices and options. Where printed Product Data includes information on several products, some of which are not required, mark copies to indicate the applicable information. Include the following information: a. Manufacturer's printed recommendations. b. Compliance with recognized trade association standards. c. Compliance with recognized testing agency standards. d. Application of testing agency labels and seals. e. Notation of dimensions verified by field measurement.Notation of coordination requirements. 2. Do not submit Product Data until compliance with requirements of the Contract Documents has been confirmed. E. The review of systems, equipment and Shop Drawings is a general review subject to the Contract Drawings, specifications and verification of all measurements at the job. Review does not relieve the provider from the responsibility of Shop Drawing errors or complying with the Specifications and Drawings. Carefully check and correct all Shop Drawings prior to submission for review. Regardless of any information included in the shop drawings submitted for review, the requirements of the Contract Documents shall not be superseded in any way by the Shop Drawing Review. F. Submit one electronic copy and three hard bound sets of shop drawings and product data grouped neatly into three-ring binders. Shop drawings shall include complete submittals of related systems, products, and accessories in a single submittal. G. Mark dimensions and values in units to match those specified. H. Submit listing of manufacturer sponsored training courses including costs and schedules. I. Submit descriptions and costs for extended warranties/maintenance programs offered by the manufacturer. 1.7 EXTRA MATERIALS A. Provide extra materials as specified in each section B. Extra materials shall be turned over to the Owner prior to receiving final payment. Obtain itemized receipt properly signed and dated. Submit with request for final payment. C. Extra materials shall be in original standard manufacturer's packaging. 1.8 PROJECT RECORD DOCUMENTS 1. Provide one electronic and three printed copies with properly labeled three ring binders with record drawings accurately indicating the equipment as manufactured and to be delivered to the site. Organize operating and maintenance data into suitable sets of manageable size. Bind properly indexed data in individual heavy-duty, 3-ring vinyl-covered binders, with pocket folders for folded sheet information. Mark appropriate identification on front and spine of each binder. Include the following types of information:Emergency instructions. 2. Spare parts list. 3. Copies of warranties. 4. Wiring diagrams. 5. Test Reports: Submit test reports for all required tests. 6. Recommended maintenance schedules. 7. Inspection procedures. 8. Shop Drawings and Product Data. 9. As-Built Drawings. B. Submit binders to the Architect prior to shipment of the equipment to the site. C. Provide O&M manuals. 1.9 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE (O&M) DATA A. Provide three printed copies and one electronic of a complete O&M manual Electronic files shall be in a readable format such as PDF. When the equipment ships. Each manual shall include one copy of each approved shop drawing, catalog pages, instruction sheets, operating instructions, installation, instructions and recommended maintenance procedures and intervals, and spare parts bulletins. Provide separate sections for each separate system. B. Prepare sets of manufacturer's catalogs, and other similar data, including the necessary photographic equipment cuts, wiring diagrams covering all equipment and devices furnished and installed under this Section. These manuals shall provide complete instructions for the proper operation and use of the equipment, together with instructions for lubrication and periodic maintenance and trouble-shooting. Operating instructions shall be specific for each system and shall include copies of posted specific instructions. This manual shall contain only that information which specifically applies to this Project and all unrelated material shall be deleted. During the instruction period, this manual shall be used and explained. The material shall be bound in 3-ring binders, indexed and have a Table of Contents. On the edge of the binder, provide a clear, see-through plastic holder with a typed card indicating the Project name, the Architect's name, the Installer's name and the Volume number (e.g., Vol. No. 1 of 2). C. Include a copy of all test reports and certifications in the O&M Manuals. D. Include name, address and telephone number of the manufacturer's representative and service company for each piece of equipment so that the source of replacement parts and service for each item of equipment can be readily obtained. 1.10 WARRANTY A. The manufacturer shall give Warranty to furnish labor, materials and associated expenses required to make good all defects in materials, equipment or B. workmanship disclosed within a period of one year from date of acceptance by Owner. Acceptance shall be contingent upon assembly and final installation and testing at the site. Extended Warranty shall be provided where specifically indicated on the contract documents. C. When correcting warranted equipment that has failed, remove and replace other work that has been damaged as a result of such failure or that must be removed and replaced to provide access for correction of warranted work. Work shall match existing quality and workmanship. D. The manufacturer shall review the final installation and provide a written statement of any deficient work by the installing Firm that will affect the Warranty. The manufacturer shall re-inspect after any corrective work has been performed. Provide written statements that all work meets manufacturer’s requirement and the Warranty is in full effect with no exceptions. E. When work covered by a Warranty has failed and been corrected by replacement or rebuilding, the manufacturer shall reinstate the Warranty by written endorsement. The reinstated Warranty shall be equal to the original Warranty with an equitable adjustment for depreciation. F. Upon determination that work covered by a Warranty has failed, replace or rebuild the work to an acceptable condition complying with good manufacturing and safety practices. G. Written warranties made to the Owner are in addition to implied warranties, and shall not limit the duties, obligations, rights and remedies otherwise available under the law, nor shall Warranty periods be interpreted as limitations on time in which the Owner can enforce such other duties, obligations, rights, or remedies. H. The Owner reserves the right to reject warranties and to limit selections to products with warranties not in conflict with requirements of the Contract Documents. I. Warranty service shall require response with factory-trained technicians within 4 hours. Parts required for Warranty Service shall arrive on site within 24 hours. System shall be fully operational within 24 hours of the call for service. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 PRODUCT SELECTION A. General Product Requirements – Provide products that comply with the Contract Documents that are undamaged and unused at the time of installation. 1. Provide products complete with all accessories, trim, finish, safety guards and other devise and details needed for a complete installation and for the intended use and effect. B. Standard Products – Where available, provide standard products of types that have been produced and used successfully in similar situations on other projects. 2.2 PRODUCT REQUIREMENTS A. Refer to individual specification sections for detailed product information. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 STARTUP A. In conjunction and cooperation with the installing Firm the manufacturer shall provide qualified Technicians or Engineers for startup assistance, (as required until successful completion) including pre-startup checkout and testing, and acceptance testing. Refer to individual specification sections for additional requirements for startup, commissioning, and on-site testing including Integrated System Testing. B. The Supplier shall be responsible for assuring that equipment provided for the project is properly commissioned prior to turning over to the Owner. All associated equipment and man hours are to be included within the scope of the Proposal/Quotation. C. Manufacturer shall include costs required to ship any missing or malfunctioning parts to the site within 24 hours, so as not to delay the startup of the project. D. Manufacturer shall verify and assist in setting any and all adjustments required for the equipment including relays, timing, overcurrent protection, BMS/BAS systems, mechanical adjustments, etc., prior to equipment energization. 3.2 TRAINING A. In conjunction with the Installer the manufacturer shall provide Owner's personnel with training. Provide a minimum of 8 hours of on-site training for each category of equipment. Provide after successful startup and operation of the equipment and at a time acceptable to the Owner. Refer to individual Sections for additional requirements. B. Give detailed instructions, using additional O&M manuals, prior to final completion of work, to the responsible personnel designated by the Owner in the operation and maintenance of all work installed under this Division. A letter with two copies containing the name of the person or persons to whom the instructions were given and the dates of the instruction period shall be submitted to the Architect at the completion of the project. C. Provide List of available offsite training for the furnished equipment with associated costs valid for one year after equipment acceptance. END OF SECTION SECTION 26 00 10 BASIC ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SCOPE OF WORK A. Contract and General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 1 Specifications are hereby made a part of Division 26, 27, and 28 as fully as if repeated herein. Where provisions of Division 1 and 26, 27, and 28 conflict, the greater or more strict shall prevail. B. This Section includes general administrative and procedural requirements for electrical installations including Division 26, 27, and 28. The requirements included in this Section expand the requirements specified in Division 1. C. Electrical work shall comply with the requirements indicated in all sections of Division 26, 27, and 28. Examine all Divisions of the specifications and drawings to determine the complete Scope of the electrical work. D. The work to be done under Divisions 26, 27, and 28 of the Specifications shall include the furnishing of all labor, material, equipment, tools and appurtenances and performing all operations necessary to provide complete, fully functional systems in accordance with the Specifications, the Drawings and requirements of the applicable codes and standards listed herein. Where the specifications, drawings, applicable codes or standards conflict provide the greater or more strict requirement. E. Visit areas of construction where Work is to take place, and examine the construction site carefully, noting locations and conditions under which the Work will be performed and accepting the responsibility for performing the Work under the existing conditions. F. The work shall include the following specification sections: 1. Division 26 a. 26 00 10 Basic Electrical Requirements b. 26 05 00 Common Work Results for Electrical c. 26 05 19 Electrical Power Conductors and Cables (600 Volts or Less) d. 26 05 26 Grounding e. 26 05 29 Hangers and Supports for Electrical Systems f. 26 05 33 Raceway and Boxes for Electrical Systems g. 26 05 36 Cable Trays for Electrical Systems h. 26 05 48 Vibration and Seismic Controls for Electrical Systems i. 26 05 53 Identification for Electrical Systems j. 26 08 00 Electrical General Commissioning Requirements k. 26 08 13 Testing of Electrical Systems l. 26 09 23 Lighting Control Devices m. 26 12 10i Medium-Voltage Transformers -Install n. 26 22 00 Low-Voltage Transformers o. 26 24 13i Switchboards – Install p. 26 24 16 Panelboards q. 26 25 00 Enclosed Bus assemblies r. 26 26 00i Power Distribution Units – Install s. 26 27 26 Wiring Devices t. 26 28 13 Fuses u. 26 28 16 Enclosed Switches and Circuit Breakers v. 26 29 13 Enclosed Controllers w. 26 29 23 Variable – Frequency Motor Controllers x. 26 32 13i Engine Generators -Install y. 26 33 53i Static Uninterruptible Power Supply – Install z. 26 36 00 Transfer Switches aa. 26 41 13 Lightning Protection For Structures bb. 26 43 13 Surge Protective Devices cc. 26 51 00 Lighting 2. Division 27 a. 27 05 00 Common Work Results for Communications b. 27 05 26 Grounding and Bonding for Communication Systems 3. Division 28 a. 28 05 13 Conductors and Cables for Electronic Safety and Security b. 28 28 31 11 Digital, Addressable Fire-Alarm System -Suite c. 28 36 00 Leak Detection System G. The work shall include, but not be limited to, providing equipment and items listed below and installing items furnished under other Divisions of these specifications. 1. Commissioning of Building Systems – assistance and coordination. 2. Electrical Service – coordinate and install. Provide metering provisions required and meet all utility requirements. 3. Conduit, wire and electrical connections to items furnished under other Divisions. 4. Supplementary steel, channel and supports. 5. Coordination with Construction Manager and General Contractor for controlled environmental conditions for stored and installed equipment in compliance with NFPA 70B and the manufacturer/vendor’s requirements. This includes equipment furnished by others and stored or installed under this Section. 6. Provide controllers, starters and variable speed drives for plumbing, fire protection, heating, ventilating and air conditioning equipment except for packaged equipment with integral controllers, unless otherwise indicated. 7. Power wiring and connections for all Heating, Ventilating, Air Conditioning, Plumbing Systems, Elevators and Utilization Equipment including power wiring to control panels. 8. Provide conduit and wiring for dock levelers, motor operated doors and windows, projection screens and their control stations. Install control stations. 9. All materials and appurtenances that can reasonably be inferred to be a part of the electrical systems and necessary to its proper operation, but not specifically mentioned or indicated on the drawings, shall be furnished and installed without additional charge. 10. Identification and Signage as required herein, by code or local authorities. 11. Concrete precast pits, manholes, handholes, frames and covers and miscellaneous hardware for work in Division 26, 27, and 28. 12. Touch-up painting of prefinished equipment furnished or damaged. 13. Fire stopping, smoke, acoustical, water and environmental seals. 14. Furnish, erect, maintain, relocate, and remove all hoisting, rigging, staging and scaffolding required to perform the work of this Section of the specifications. 15. Provide cutting and patching under Provisions of Division 1. 16. Provide core drilling through concrete, steel reinforcement and metal decking. 17. Provide required sleeves. Coordinate and set sleeves and watertight fittings in construction as it progresses so as not to impede the work of other trades. 18. Mounting of the final full size as-built electrical one-line diagram on the wall of the electrical room between two sheets of plexiglass. Secure back sheet to wall and secure front sheet separately so it can be removed to allow updating of the one-line diagram. Provide clips and a lip at the bottom of the back sheet to secure the drawing to prior to overlaying the top sheet of plexiglass. 19. Compliance with construction requirements and procedures to qualify for LEED points. 20. Start up and acceptance testing for all systems provided or installed under this section. Include all requirements indicated herein, recommended by manufacturer or system vendor, and as required by the Owner or Commissioning Authority. Submit written documentation of all inspections and testing. 21. Commissioning of Building Systems – assistance and coordination with Owner and Commissioning Authority. 22. Attendance at and support of Integrated Systems Testing (after all start-up and acceptance testing is complete) of all systems. Include in bid time for 2 electricians (including foreman) for 3 days at a minimum. Refer to individual sections for required scope. 1.2 RELATED WORK A. The following items of procedures, requirements, labor and material incidental and/or related to the installation of the Electrical Work are specified under other Divisions of these Specifications unless specifically indicated otherwise. Provide, assist and coordinate work to meet requirements indicated in the Specifications and on the Drawings. 1. Cutting and patching in accordance with the requirements under Division 1. 2. Temporary fire alarm system -Division 1. 3. Temporary electric services including consumption fees are to be provided by the General Contractor in accordance with Division 1. 4. Controlled environmental conditions for electrical equipment per the manufacturer's recommendations or as specified in this Division by the General Contractor. 5. Excavation and backfilling -Division 31. 6. Concrete work including forms for duct banks, transformer pads, lighting standards, housekeeping pads for equipment -Division 3. 7. Reinforcing steel -Division 5. 8. Watertight penetrations for electrical conduits through roof -Division 7. 9. Flashing and caulking -Division 7. 10. Setting of frames for access panels -Division 8. 11. Painting of all equipment and material other than touch up of prefinished fixtures, equipment and other Electrical components -Division 9. 12. Furnishing and setting of motors for Process, Heating, Ventilating, Air Conditioning and Plumbing Systems is included under each applicable Division of work. 13. Temperature control systems for Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning systems including controls, relays, time clocks, wiring and devices are provided under Divisions 23/25 unless specifically indicated otherwise. 14. Aquastats, alternators, float switches and other direct control devices for the control of the Plumbing System Equipment are provided under Division 22 unless specifically indicated otherwise. 15. Utility (electric, telephone, cable TV, fire alarm) backcharges will be paid by the General Contractor with no additional markups allowed. Refer to Section 01005 for Utility backcharges. 16. Communications equipment is by Owner. 17. Telephone system equipment and instruments are provided by the owner. 18. Control devices for plumbing, fire protection, heating, ventilating and air conditioning equipment are included under Division 21, 22, 23, 25 unless otherwise indicated. 19. Security system equipment, wiring and connection under Division 28 unless specifically indicated otherwise. 20. Wiring or Connection of Owner's Equipment, unless indicated on the Drawings or in the Specifications. B. The following items incidental and/or related to the installation of the electrical work will be furnished and/or installed by others and wired and/or installed under this Section. 1. Sprinkler system tamper, flow and pressure switches are provided under Division 21 and wired under this Section. 2. Any Division 21, 22, 23 furnished motor controllers, variable frequency drives, capacitors and associated disconnects for installation under this Section. Generally these are provided under this Section. 3. Duct smoke detectors in computer room air conditioning units (CRAC, CRAH, etc.) are integral to the unit. Connect to the fire alarm system through an addressable relay. C. Furnish the following items for installation by others and provide coordination, cooperation, assistance and wiring as required: 1. Duct smoke detectors for installation in ductwork per NFPA 72 under Division 2. 23. Furnish quantity required to meet the installation requirements of NFPA 3. 72. 4. Pitch pocket or approved roofing penetration material for conduit or lightning protection system for installation under Division 7. 5. Furnish access panels as required for electrical work behind finished surfaces or otherwise concealed for installation under Division 8. 6. Precast pits, concrete manholes and handholes for installation under Division 3. D. Install items purchased by others. Coordinate delivery and be responsible for unloading from delivery vehicles, rigging, and for safe handling and field storage up to the time of installation. This Section shall be responsible for: 1. Coordination of delivery and shipping splits for size and weight restrictions of the project site. 2. Any necessary field assembly and internal connections, as well as mounting in place of the items, including the purchase and installation of all dunnage supporting members and fastenings necessary to adapt them to architectural and structural conditions. 3. Connection to building systems including the purchase and installation of all terminating fittings, lugs, etc. necessary to adapt and connect them to the building systems. 4. Provide all work indicated in the specifications and on the drawings related to the pre-purchased items that are not specifically indicated as pre-purchased. 5. Carefully examine such items upon delivery, and advise the General Contractor and Owner of any damages or defects noted, as well as the shipper. 6. Installation, testing, coordination of vendor’s work and responsibilities and compliance with warranty coverage, requirements and support. 7. Pre-purchased equipment as specified in the following sections: a. 26 12 10p -Medium-Voltage Transformers – Purchase b. 261319p – Medium Voltage Underground Distribution Switchgear .c. Purchase d. 26 26 00p -Power Distribution Units -Purchase e. 26 24 13p -Switchboards – Purchase f. 26 32 13p -Engine Generators – Purchase g. 26 32 14p -Engine Generator Set Enclosure -Purchase h. 26 33 53p -Static Uninterruptible Power Supply – Purchase i. 263610p – Static Transfer Switch -Purchase E. Work by Owner 1. Refer to Division 1 for additional requirements and information. 2. Accommodate concurrent work provided by Owner. F. Existing Materials 1. All existing equipment and materials to be reused is assumed to be in good operating condition. 2. Any existing electrical equipment to be reused (i.e., panels, light fixtures, etc.) found to be defective, upon commencement of this contract, shall be reported to the Architect. 3. Guarantee all replacement work, equipment or materials for a period of one year from date of acceptance by the Architect. 1.3 COORDINATION OF THE WORK A. Refer to Division 1 for additional requirements for coordination of the Work including Section 01 31 00 Project Management and Coordination. B. Before submitting bid examine all Drawings and Specifications, including other Divisions, for requirements that affect work of this Division and include it in the scope of work for this section whether or not such work is specifically mentioned in this Division. Be responsible, under this Division of the Specifications, for the proper coordination of the electrical work with the installations under other Divisions, including proper clearances. Any changes required to avoid interferences shall be submitted to the Architect for approval and shall be made as approved, without additional cost to the Owner. C. Coordinate work with that of all other trades affecting or affected by work of this Division. Cooperate with such trades to ensure the steady progress of work under the contract. D. Coordinate work with the General Contractor and the project schedule. Provide manpower and materials as required to meet the schedule and not to interfere with or impede the progress of or increase the cost of work by others. Submit shop drawings and order equipment in a timely manner. Expedite deliveries and manufacturing as required. E. Deliver products to the project in a timely manner to meet all schedule requirements, properly identified with name, model numbers, compliance labels, and other information needed for identification. F. Install materials and apparatus as fast as conditions of the building will permit. Materials and apparatus must be installed when directed and in the fashion specified. Examine the Architectural Drawings for the location of suitable openings and aisles for the passage of equipment to be installed under this Section. The installer shall be responsible for having suitable openings and aisles left open until his equipment has been properly installed. If necessary, request the vendor to ship equipment in sections sized to permit passage. Provide sleeves, pockets, supports and incidentals. G. Examine the drawings, the building construction, and vertical transportation for weight and size restrictions. Provide equipment and installation methods to comply with restrictions including shipping split sizes, weights, and disassembled components as required. Obtain manufacturer’s approval and assurance warranty will be honored. H. Prepare and submit coordination drawings in conjunction with the other Trades, on common CAD drawings of at least 3/8”=1’-0”, as directed by the General Contractor. Each system shall be color-coded, and for cad drawings, each system shall be on a different layer. Meet to resolve conflicts between the various I. Installers prior to submission to the Architect for review. Identify conflicts resolved that include changes to the design. Note on coordination drawings submitted to the Architect any conflicts that the trades could not resolve. The Architect will provide direction that all Installers will comply with, at no additional cost to the project. In general, distribution systems which require pitch or slope such as plumbing drains, steam and condensate piping shall have the right of way over those which do not. Lighting fixtures have minimal flexibility and should not be moved without prior approval. Install work to avoid interferences and to allow proper clearance around all trades' work for access, maintenance and as required by code. Prepare coordination drawings in the following order (subject to above): HVAC (with lighting fixtures indicated), plumbing, fire protection, electrical and telecommunications systems. Work installed prior to complete and reviewed coordination drawings must be corrected as required at no additional expense to the project. J. In all spaces, prior to installation of visible material and equipment, including access panels, review Architectural Drawings for exact locations and where not definitely indicated request information from Architect. K. Check Contract Drawings as well as Shop Drawings of all Installers and vendors to verify and coordinate space in which work of this section will be installed. L. Obtain from manufacturers the proper method of installation and connection of the equipment that is to be furnished, installed or wired. Obtain all information that is necessary to facilitate the work and to complete the project. 1.4 QUALIFICATIONS / QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Refer to Division 1 for additional requirements for quality assurance and control of the installation. B. Receive, handle, house, and protect equipment required for installation under this specification. Replace damaged equipment with new equipment. Provide environmental requirements per NFPA 70B and manufacturer’s requirements during shipping, storage and installation. C. Review submittals of equipment furnished under other Divisions prior to installation and electrical rough-in. Verify location, size, and required connections. Coordinate details of equipment connections with supplier and Installer. D. Utilize Installers with at least five years experienced and properly licensed or certified in the type of work to be performed. E. Manufacturers shall be companies experienced and are properly licensed or certified in manufacturing products specified for a minimum of five years. F. Be responsible for the care and protection of all work included in this Section until it has been tested and accepted. G. Protect all equipment and materials from damage from all causes including theft. All materials and equipment damaged or stolen shall be repaired or replaced with equal material or equipment. H. Protect all equipment, outlets and openings with temporary plugs, caps and covers. Protect work and materials of other trades from damage that might be caused by work or workmen and make good any damage caused. I. Provide workmanship in accordance with the best accepted practices. Rework installations judged by the Architect as unacceptable. J. Power Quality Specialist Qualifications: A registered professional electrical engineer or engineering technician, currently certified by the National Institute for Certification in Engineering Technologies, NICET Level 4, minimum, experienced in performance testing UPS installations and in performing power quality surveys similar to that required in "Performance Testing" Article. K. Testing Agency Qualifications: Member company of NETA or an NRTL. 1. Testing Agency’s Field Supervisor: Currently certified by NETA to supervise on-site testing. L. Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. M. UL Compliance: Listed and labeled under UL 1778 by an NRTL. 1.5 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS A. Refer to Division 1 for additional regulatory or reference requirements. B. Arrange and pay for permits, licenses, inspections and certificates. Give the proper Authorities all requisite notices or information required relating to the work under this Section. Request inspections from Authorities having jurisdiction. At the conclusion of the work, deliver certificates of inspection from authorities having jurisdiction to the Owner's Representative. C. Provide products listed and classified by an OSHA certified Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory (NRTL) as suitable for purpose specified and indicated. Provide NRTL-listed material and equipment where standards are available. Notify Architect of any material or equipment that is not NRTL listed when submitting information. D. Perform work in strict accordance with the rules, regulations, listing or labeling requirements, standards, codes, ordinances, and laws of local, state, and Federal governments, and other authorities having legal jurisdiction over the site. No additional compensation shall be granted for work that must be changed as a result of the work not originally complying with the codes, standards, local requirements, etc. E. Equipment and installation shall be suitable for the wind, snow, ice, flood, and earthquake requirements indicated in the Building Code and ASCE 7 for the location and usage. 1. Building occupancy classification per ASCE 7 – category II 2. Spectral Acceleration Parameters: a. SS = 0.098g b. S1 = 0.051g 3. Seismic Design Category: A 4. Site Class as defined in the IBC: C 5. Component importance factor is 1.0 6. Wind Load = 125 MPH 7. Snow Load = 5 PSF F. Materials and equipment shall be manufactured, installed and tested as specified in the latest and required editions of applicable parts of the following publications, standards and rulings of: 1. State and local codes and ordinances. 2. Local Utility Company Requirements and Standards. 3. NEC -National Electrical Code (ANSI/NFPA 70). 4. UL -Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. 5. NRTL -Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory. (OSHA Certified) 6. NEMA -National Electrical Manufacturers' Association 7. IEEE -Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers 8. ASTM -American Society for Testing Materials 9. ANSI -American National Standards Institute 10. NBFU -National Board of Fire Underwriters 11. NFPA -National Fire Protection Association 12. ICEA -Insulated Cable Engineers' Association 13. OSHA -Occupational Safety and Health Act 14. IMSA -International Municipal Signal Association. 15. FM -Factory Mutual 16. AADAG -Americans with Disabilities Act Guidelines 17. EIA/TIA -Electronics Industry Association / Telecommunications Industry Association 18. BICSI – Building Industry Consulting Service International, Inc. 19. ASCE7 – Minimum Design loads for Buildings and other Structures G. Where conflicts occur among the codes, ordinances, standards, Drawings or Specifications, the more restrictive requirements shall govern. H. The Drawings and Specifications do not undertake to repeat requirements written or all work required in the above codes, ordinances and standards. I. Comply with applicable codes and regulations regarding toxicity of combustion products of materials used. J. Legally dispose of all material. Adhere to all regulations regarding disposal of hazardous material. Recycle hazardous material where recycling is possible. Submit certificates of legal recycling or disposal to the Architect. Include copy in the Owner and Maintenance Manual. K. Nothing in these Contract Documents shall be construed to permit work not conforming with applicable codes and regulations. When conflicts occur the more restrictive requirements shall govern. L. Should the Facility have established building standards, rules or regulations, obtain a copy from the Building Owner and comply with them. 1.6 SUBMITTALS A. Provide and submit under provisions of Division 1 and as indicated herein. B. Submit at time of bid any equipment or materials that have lead times that will affect the construction schedule. Provide alternate costs to expedite delivery and manufacturing so that the project schedule can be accomplished. C. Submit at time of bid, any proposed substitutions. List reasons the owner should accept substitutions including improved performance or equal performance and improved delivery time. Acceptance of substitutions is subject to acceptance by the Architect, whose decision will be final. A substitution is considered to be any manufacturer or product not specifically identified in the specifications or drawings. If only performance requirements are indicated, and no specific manufacturer is indicated, then a manufacturer meeting the Contract Document requirements is not considered a substitute. D. Substitutions of specifically indicated items will be reviewed only if identified at time of bid, otherwise submittals will be returned rejected. It is the proposer’s responsibility to submit the first time, all information required to prove equality and a written letter on the proposer’s letterhead indicating that the item is in full compliance with the Contract Documents and will fit in the designated location. Include in bid, coordination of all work and all costs for all trades for any work that may be required, including any architectural or engineering fees, to accommodate the substitution. Acceptance of the proposed substitution is up to the Architect and is not assured. Review will include, but is not limited to, quality, life cycle costs, size, appearance, construction, manufacturer, service record, efficiency, dependability, performance, etc. E. Submit for review, within 10 days after being given Notice to Proceed and prior to the submission of any shop drawings, an itemized list of manufacturers of material and equipment and of firms or subcontractors proposed to be used to perform the work. Include a list of submissions and the proposed schedule to submit them, so that based on the approval times and procedures indicated below, the proposed project schedule will be accomplished. FAILURE TO SUBMIT WITHIN THE TIME LIMIT OF 10 DAYS WILL BE CONSIDERED A CONTRACT VIOLATION and will F. require that all items will be provided in a timely manner to maintain the schedule and all costs required to meet the schedule are included to expedite delivery and manufacturing. G. After approval of the list and schedule, submit 1 electronic and 3 bound hard sets of detailed Shop Drawings and product Data per the submission schedule or within 30 days or sooner if required to meet the construction schedule. Substitutions will not be accepted for failure to comply with the schedule above. Electronic Submissions shall match the requirements for hard copy submissions. Provide one hard copy submission that matches the Electronic Submission. H. Submit related shop drawings at one time. SUBMIT ALL ITEMS IN A SPECIFICATION SECTION AT THE SAME TIME. Incomplete submittals will be held until a complete submittal is accumulated. I. The review of systems, equipment and Shop Drawings is a general review subject to the Contract Drawings, specifications and verification of all measurements at the job. Review does not relieve the Installer from the responsibility of Shop Drawing errors or complying with the Specifications and Drawings. Carefully check and correct all Shop Drawings prior to submission for approval. Regardless of any information included in the shop drawings submitted for review, the requirements of the Contract Documents shall not be superseded in any way by the Shop Drawing Review. J. Mark submittals to clearly identify (including when photocopied) proposed equipment including their accessories, options, and modifications and exclude parts not applicable to the Project, otherwise the Architect will identify items and options to be provided at no additional cost to the project. K. Each submittal including electronic submittals, shall be reviewed, stamped and certified prior to submission to the Architect. Such certification shall be made by a person duly authorized to sign binding Agreements for the Contractor. The certification shall state that the data and details contained on each Shop Drawing, layout drawing, catalog data and brochure has been reviewed by the Contractor for conformance to the contract documents and that it complies with the Contract Documents in all respects. Submittals will not be reviewed and will be returned to the Contractor unchecked unless they are certified. L. It is intended that Submittals be complete and accurate at the first submission. If the Submittal is returned marked "Resubmit," only one additional submittal will be permitted. If the second Submission is not acceptable, the right of selection will be lost and the Architect will specify exactly what is required and the specified products shall be provided at no additional cost to the Project. M. A minimum period of two weeks, exclusive of transmittal time of the hard copies, will be required by the Architect's office each time Submittals are submitted or resubmitted for review. This time period shall be considered when scheduling the work, and any costs associated with expediting equipment delivery to meet the Schedule will be at no additional cost to the Owner. Submittals of numerous items at the same time may extend the time needed for review, so plan accordingly. N. Provide submittals in a timely manner sufficiently in advance to give ample time for checking, correcting, resubmitting and rechecking if necessary. No claim for delay or additional costs will be granted for failure to comply with this requirement. O. If proposed equipment deviates from the Specifications or Drawings, indicate those differences and provide sufficient data to justify acceptance. FAILURE TO INDICATE DEVIATIONS OR SUBSTITUTIONS IMPLIES FULL COMPLIANCE WITH DRAWINGS AND SPECIFICATIONS. P. Indicate clearly all equipment, components or assemblies that are not NRTL listed or labeled. Failure to indicate otherwise implies NRTL listing or labeling. Q. Provide products of one manufacturer for each classification of equipment. R. Meet Project requirements including space, size and weight restrictions before submitting to Architect. Equipment shall be of proper size for its allocated space. Equipment may be disassembled so that it can be installed through available openings only if it will not invalidate manufacturer's warranties. S. At the job site, maintain the latest equipment submittals showing the action taken by the Architect. Make these submittals available to Architect. T. Product Data: Submit catalog data sheets or other published materials showing appearances, electrical ratings characteristics and connection requirements, performance characteristics, dimensions, weights, installation methods, and space requirements of electrical equipment and their accessories, as listed below and required by the individual sections. 1. 26 05 00 Common Work Results for Electrical 2. 26 05 19 Conductors and Cables (600V and Below) 3. 26 05 26 Grounding 4. 26 05 29 Hangers and Supports for Electrical Systems 5. 26 05 33 Raceways and Boxes for Electrical Systems 6. 26 05 43 Underground Ducts and Raceways for Electrical Systems 7. 26 05 48 Vibration and Seismic Controls for Electrical Systems 8. 26 05 53 Identification for Electrical Systems 9. 26 09 23 Lighting Control Devices 10. 26 22 13 Low-Voltage Transformers 11. 26 25 00 Enclosed Bus assemblies 12. 26 27 26 Wiring Devices 13. 26 28 13 Fuses 14. 26 28 16 Enclosed Switches and Circuit Breakers 15. 26 29 13 Enclosed Motor Controllers 16. 26 29 23 Variable – Frequency Motor Controllers 17. 26 43 00 Surge Protective Devices 18. 26 50 00 Lighting 19. 27 05 28 Low Voltage Raceway Distribution 20. 27 15 00 Communications Horizontal Cabling 21. 28 05 13 Conductors and Cables for Electronic Safety and Security U. Shop Drawings: Submit shop drawings (drawn to scale) indicating physical size and arrangement, (plans and elevations) construction details, provisions for conduits, access requirements for installation and maintenance, finishes, and materials used in fabrication. Supplement shop drawings with wiring diagrams and information as described under Product Data. Provide shop drawings for the following and as required by the individual sections: 1. 26 24 16 Panelboards 2. 26 25 00 Enclosed Bus assemblies 3. 26 36 00 Static Transfer Switches 4. 26 41 00 Lightning Protection System for Structures 5. 28 31 11 Digital Addressable Fire Alarm System 6. 28 36 00 Leak Detection System V. Manufacturer's Instructions: 1. Indicate application conditions and limitations of use stipulated by product testing agency specified under regulatory requirements. 2. Include instructions for storage, handling, protection, examination, preparation, operation and installation of product. 3. Include instructions on manufacturer’s requirements for cable restraint in equipment. 4. Submit manufacturer’s standard and recommended receiving start up and acceptance testing checklists. W. In addition to copies of submittals as required under Operation and Maintenance Manuals, provide electronic copies on CDs or DVDs of all submittal information in PDF or Microsoft Word format with O&M manuals. 1.7 EXTRA MATERIALS A. Provide extra materials as specified in each section. B. Extra materials shall be turned over to the Owner prior to receiving final payment. Obtain itemized receipt properly signed and dated. Submit with request for final payment. C. Extra materials shall be in original standard manufacturer's packaging. 1.8 PROJECT RECORD DOCUMENTS A. Provide and submit under provisions of Division 1 and this Section the following: 1. Record Drawings 2. Specifications 3. Product Data 4. Operation and Maintenance Manual. 5. Equipment Warranties. 6. Certification of proper disposal of regulated materials. B. Refer to Division 1 for additional Project record document requirements beyond those indicated herein. C. Provide and maintain at the site a set of prints on which shall be accurately indicated the actual installation of all work under this Division, indicating any variation from Contract Drawings, including change orders, field conditions, Architect's direction and changes in sizes, locations and dimensions. Changes in circuitry shall be clearly and completely indicated as the work progresses. Modify Schedules to reflect data consistent with that of the installed equipment. D. Record Drawings shall be maintained in a clean, dry and legible condition and shall not be used for construction purposes. E. These progress prints shall be available for inspection by the Architect and shall be used to determine the progress of electrical work. Indicate daily progress by color-coding materials and apparatus installed. Progress prints shall be reviewed weekly and shall be corrected immediately if found inaccurate or incomplete. Drawings will be used as a guide for determining the progress of the work installed. Requisitions for payment will not be approved until the Drawings are accurate and up-to-date. F. At the completion of the work, obtain and pay for a CADD set of record drawings, modify drawings to represent the work as actually noted on the marked-up prints, including the DIMENSIONED location of all underground conduit. Remove all superseded data to show only the completed installation. Mark all Drawings as "Final Record Drawings" and date them. G. Electronic files shall be AutoCad 2019 or 3D or Revit. H. Provide phase load data and final circuit identification for all panelboards as part of Record Drawing submittal. I. Furnish these record documents to the Architect for review and transmission to the Owner. 1.9 OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS AND MAINTENANCE (O&M) DATA A. In addition to the requirements of Section 01 78 23, provide the following: After completion of the work and prior to final completion furnish and deliver three copies of a complete O&M manual. Each manual shall include one copy of each approved shop drawing, catalog pages, instruction sheets, operating instructions, installation, instructions and recommended maintenance procedures and intervals, and spare parts bulletins. Provide separate sections for each separate system, i.e., power system, lighting system, fire alarm system, sound system, security system, etc. B. Give detailed instructions, using O&M manuals, prior to final completion of work, to the responsible personnel designated by the Owner in the operation and maintenance of all work installed under this Division. A letter with two copies containing the name of the person or persons to whom the instructions were given and the dates of the instruction period shall be submitted to the Architect at the completion of the project. Provide instructions for the following: 1. Switchboards. 2. Static Transfer switch and Transfer Switch operation. 3. Lighting control system. 4. Fire alarm system. 5. Leak detection system. 6. UPS system. 7. PDU system. 8. Electrical metering. C. Prepare sets of manufacturer's catalogs, and other similar data, including the necessary photographic equipment cuts, wiring diagrams covering all mechanical equipment and devices under this Section. These manuals shall provide complete instructions for the proper operation and use of the equipment, together with instructions for lubrication and periodic maintenance and trouble-shooting. Operating instructions shall be specific for each system and shall include copies of posted specific instructions. This manual shall contain only that information which specifically applies to this Project and all unrelated material shall be deleted. During the instruction period, this manual shall be used and explained. The material shall be bound in 3-ring binders, indexed and have a Table of Contents. On the edge of the binder, provide a clear, see-through plastic holder with a typed card indicating the Project name, the Architect's name, the Installer's name and the Volume number (e.g., Vol. No. 1 of 2). D. Include a copy of all inspection sign offs, test reports and certifications in the O&M Manuals. E. Include name, address and telephone number of the manufacturer's representative and service company for each piece of equipment so that the source of replacement parts and service for each item of equipment can be readily obtained. F. Provide three copies of the O&M manual information on CD ROM or DVD. Files shall be in a readable format such as PDF or image files (TIF, etc). Record drawings shall be scanned in, and shall also include the AutoCad dwg files if Record Drawings are provided on Cad. G. Furnish these manuals to the Architect for review and transmission to Owner. 1.10 WARRANTY A. Refer to individual sections and Division 1 for additional warranty (guarantee) requirements. B. Remedy work performed under this Division that is found not to comply with the Contract Documents, requires excessive service, or fails less than one year from the date of final acceptance. C. Manufacturers shall provide their standard warranties for material and equipment furnished under this Division, unless otherwise indicated in each Section. D. Materials, equipment and work furnished under this Division shall be guaranteed against all defects in materials and workmanship for a period of one year, commencing with the date of final acceptance by the Owner. Any failure due to defective material, equipment or workmanship shall be corrected as quickly as possible and at no expense to the Owner, including all damage to areas, materials and other systems resulting from such failures. E. Upon receipt of notice from the Owner of failure of any part of the systems during the guarantee period, the affected parts shall be replaced as quickly as possible. Any equipment requiring excessive service (more than two unscheduled services) shall be considered defective and shall be replaced. 1.11 LEED / SUSTAINABILITY A. Comply with the requirements of Section 01 81 13 – Sustainable Design Requirements. B. Minimize packing materials delivered to the site to minimize waste and maximize opportunity for qualifying for LEED points. 1.12 INTERPRETATION OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS A. Division One, General and Supplementary Conditions are in addition to the requirements indicated in Division 26, 27, and 28, Drawings and Specifications. B. Where Drawings or Specifications conflict or are unclear, advise Architect in writing before Award of Contract. Otherwise, interpretations of Contract Documents by the Architect shall be final, and no additional compensation shall be permitted due to discrepancies or unclarities resolved according to the Architect's interpretation. C. The intent of the Drawings and Specifications is to assist and guide and to establish minimum requirements. D. Drawings and Specifications form complimentary requirements; provide work specified and not indicated, and work indicated and not specified as though explicitly required by both. E. Should there be conflicts in Contract Documents, provide the greater quantity, the higher quality and the more restrictive of equipment and work. F. Electrical Drawings do not limit responsibility of determining full extent of work required by Contract Documents. Refer to Architectural, HVAC, Electrical, Telecommunications, Security, Plumbing, Fire Protection, Structural, specialty trades and other Drawings and other Divisions that indicate types of construction in which work shall be installed and work of other trades with which work of this Division must be coordinated. G. Except where modified by a specific notation to the contrary, it shall be understood that the indication and/or description of any item, in the Drawings or Specifications or both, carries with it the instruction to furnish and install the item, regardless of whether or not this instruction is explicitly stated as part of the indication or description. H. Items referred to in singular number in Contract Documents shall be provided in quantities necessary to complete work. I. Where Drawings or Specifications do not coincide with manufacturer's recommendations, or with applicable Codes and Standards, alert Architect in writing before installation. Otherwise, make changes in installed work as Architect requires within Contract Price. J. It is the intent of these Contract Documents to have systems and components that are fully complete and operational and fully suitable for the intended use. There may be situations in the documents where insufficient information exists to precisely describe a certain component or subsystem, or the routing of a component. In cases such as this, where the bidder has failed to notify the Architect of the situation prior to contract award, provide the specific component or subsystem with all parts necessary for the intended use, fully complete and operational, and installed in workmanlike manner either concealed or exposed per the design intent. K. In situations or where potential conflicts and Installer believes guidance is required, submit a sketch identifying a proposed solution and the Architect shall review, note if necessary, and return this sketch appropriately marked as required. L. Portions of these Drawings and Specifications are abbreviated and may include incomplete sentences. Infer the omitted words or phrases such as "the Contractor shall", "shall be", "as indicated on the Drawings", "in accordance with details", "a", "the", and "all". M. "As permitted" means by Code, by Architect or by prevailing conditions. N. "Acceptable", "approved", and "satisfactory" means by Architect. O. Work indicated on the Drawings is intended to be approximately correct to scale, but figures, dimensions, and detailed Drawings are to be followed. Take measurements at the building before fabrication commences.Size of pipes or conduits and methods of installing them are indicated, but it is not intended to show every offset and fitting, nor every structural difficulty that may be encountered. P. Drawings are generally diagrammatic and indicate the arrangement and approximate location of fixtures, equipment and conduits. When necessary to deviate from the arrangement indicated, to meet structural conditions or to clear work of other Divisions, inform the Architect of proposed deviation before proceeding. Obtain in the field all information relevant to the placing of electrical work. Q. Drawings and Specifications do not undertake to indicate every item required to produce a complete and properly operating installation. Materials, equipment or labor not indicated but which can be reasonably inferred to be necessary for a fully complete, secure and properly operating installation suitable for the intended use shall be provided. R. The right is reserved to make reasonable changes in locations of equipment indicated in Drawings prior to installation without increase in contract cost. S. Schematic diagrams shown on the drawings indicate the required functions only. Standard circuits of the particular manufacturer may be used to accomplish the functions indicated without exact adherence to the schematic drawings shown. Furnish additional wiring or conduit required for such deviations. T. Generally, except in the case of certain raceways and empty and underground raceways, the runs of feeder, branch circuits, communications and signal systems raceways are not indicated on the drawings. Final determination as to the routing shall be governed by structural conditions, and interferences with other trades and by terminal locations on apparatus. U. Contract Documents indicate scope of work required. Jurisdictional assignment shall be a responsibility under this Section's contractual obligation. V. The Term "Conduit" or "C" is used on the Drawings as a generic term for raceways. The exact raceway to be used shall be as specified in the specifications or notes. W. The following definitions apply to the Drawings and Specifications: 1. Furnish: The term "furnish" is used to mean "supply and deliver to the Project site, ready for unloading, unpacking, assembly, installation, and similar operations." 2. Install: The term "install" is used to describe operations at project site including the actual "unloading, unpacking, rigging in place, assembly, erection, placing, anchoring, applying, working to dimension, finishing, curing, protecting, cleaning, and similar operations". 3. Provide: The term "provide" means to "furnish and install, complete and ready for the intended use".Installer: An "Installer" is the Contractor or an entity engaged by the Contractor, either as an Employee, Subcontractor, or Sub-Subcontractor for performance of a particular construction activity, including installation, erection, application, and similar operations. Installers are required to be experienced in the operations they are engaged to perform. 1.13 TEMPORARY LIGHT, POWER AND FIRE ALARM A. Work provided under Division 1. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 SPECIFIED PRODUCTS AND SUBSTITUTIONS A. Provide new, unused, full weight, standard equipment that meets or exceeds Contract Document requirements to the satisfaction of the Architect. No equipment or material shall be used unless previously approved by the Architect. B. The manufacturer's catalog number and description is the basis of the design and establishes quality and performance required for this project. Generally, the first manufacturer listed is the one the project design is based on. C. Manufacturers of generally compatible products may also be listed, subject to compliance with requirements. Substitution of equal products or manufacturers of equal products are also acceptable when indicated in each section. D. The description following a catalog number is basically to identify the item but may also call for accessories, options, or modifications that are beyond the cataloged item. QTS FTW1 DC1 EXPANSION  21407.0200  ISSUE FOR PERMIT  MARCH 28, 2025  PART 3 -EXECUTION  3.1 PREPARATION A. Prior to beginning work in a particular area of the project visit the site and examine conditions under which work must be performed, including preparatory work done under other Divisions or Contracts or by the Owner. Report conditions that might affect work adversely in writing through Contractor to Architect. Do not proceed with work until defects have been corrected and conditions are satisfactory. Commencement of work shall be construed as complete acceptance of existing conditions and preparatory work. B. Arrangements shall be made to have the openings, inserts, sleeves and other such incidentals set in place ahead of the construction work, where practical to C. eliminate the need for cutting and patching. If cutting becomes necessary for the installation of the work, it shall be done under this Division in accordance with the requirements of Division 1 and other applicable Divisions. All openings shall be neatly patched and finished to match the adjoining work in a manner approved by the Architect, any penetration in fire-rated walls or floors must be fire-stopped as indicated in Division 7 and Section 26 05 00 – Common Work Results for Electrical. All cutting shall be performed in a manner not to weaken the structural parts. The cutting manner and method shall meet the approval of the Architect. D. The equipment shall be kept upright at all times. If equipment has to be tilted for ease of passage through restricted areas, the manufacturer shall brace the equipment to ensure that the tilting does not impair the functional integrity of the equipment. Comply with manufacturer’s requirements. 3.2 INSTALLATION A. Do not cut structural members without written acknowledgement from the Architect. B. Do not attach to metal roof decking. C. Arrange equipment so working parts are accessible for inspection, repair, and renewal. D. Where not specified or indicated, mount equipment at heights directed by the Architect. E. Generally, the Drawings do not show wiring. Provide wiring to best suit circuiting indicated on the Drawings. F. Single-phase non-lighting circuits require separate neutrals. Circuits to data processing equipment and isolated or dedicated circuits require separate neutrals. Circuits for lighting may use common neutrals as allowed by the Electric Code. Systems furniture shall use common neutrals as indicated on the Drawings. G. Do not combine or reduce the number of homeruns indicated on the Drawings without written acknowledgement from the Architect. H. Locate pull boxes, panelboards, control pushbuttons, terminal cabinets, safety switches and such other apparatus as may require periodic maintenance, operation, or inspection, so that they are easily accessible. If such items are shown on the plans in locations which are found to be inaccessible, advise the Architect of the situation before work is advanced to the point where extra costs will be involved. I. Circuits on panelboards shall be field connected to result in evenly balanced loads on each phase. J. The panelboard circuit numbering system is for outlet grouping purposes only indicate the final circuit identification on the Record Drawings and the panelboard schedules. K. Any work installed contrary to Contract Drawings shall be subject to change as directed by the Architect, and no extra compensation will be allowed for making these changes. L. Where installed in damp, wet and areas requiring washing down, all surface mounted panel boxes, junction boxes, conduit, etc., shall be supported by spacers to provide a clearance between wall and equipment. M. All connections to equipment shall be made as required, and in accordance with the approved shop and setting drawings. N. Unless otherwise approved by the Architect, conduit indicated exposed shall be installed exposed; conduit indicated concealed shall be installed concealed. O. Where exact locations are required for roughing in, stubbing-up and terminating conduit request Shop Drawings, equipment location drawings, foundation drawings, and any other data required to locate the concealed conduit before the floor slab is poured or wall or ceiling is installed. P. Verify the ceiling type, ceiling suspension system and clearance above hung ceilings prior to ordering lighting fixtures. Notify the Architect of any discrepancies. Q. Fire ratings of enclosures, walls, ceilings, and floors shall be maintained. Penetrations for electrical Work shall be fire-stopped as indicated in Division 7, Section 26 05 00, or indicated in individual Sections on Drawings, or by Architect. Review Architectural drawings for fire ratings. R. Smoke ratings, acoustical, water tightness of enclosures, walls, ceilings, and floors shall be maintained. Provide necessary fittings, accessories and coordination as required. S. Do not use powder actuated tools or anchors without written permission from the General Contractor or Construction Manager. Only allow personnel who are properly trained and licensed to use the powder actuated tools. 3.3 TESTING AND STARTUP A. Provide start up and acceptance testing as indicated in individual sections and in Section 26 08 13. Submit written results. B. Assist Owner in performing Integrated Systems Testing. 3.4 INSTRUCTIONS A. For additional requirements for starting, demonstration, and instructions of systems refer to Division 1. B. Provide starting, demonstration, and instructions of systems as required in individual Sections. C. Ensure that the Owner's operating personnel are made entirely familiar with the nature, operation, and maintenance of the systems and equipment provided under this Division. 3.5 SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION A. For additional requirements refer to Section 01 77 00 Closeout Procedures. B. When Work under this Section (or designated portion of Work) is considered substantially complete, submit written notice through the General Contractor with a list of items remaining to be completed or corrected. C. All systems shall be operational and tested. Submit test reports. D. Submit local authority final sign off inspection reports. Include copy in O&M manuals. E. Should Architect observe and find Work is not substantially complete, written notification will be provided listing observed deficiencies. F. Remedy deficiencies and send a second written notice of substantial completion. G. When Architect finds Work is substantially complete, a Certificate of Substantial Completion will be prepared in accordance with provisions of General Conditions. H. Submit test reports for review prior to Architect’s site visit. 3.6 FINAL COMPLETION A. For additional requirements refer to Section 01 77 00 Closeout Procedures. B. When Work under this Section is considered complete, submit through the General Contractor written certification that: 1. Contract documents have been reviewed. 2. Work has been inspected for compliance with Contract Documents. 3. Work has been completed in accordance with Contract Documents (and deficiencies listed with Certificate of Substantial Completion have been corrected).Equipment and systems have been tested, adjusted and balanced and are fully operational. 4. Work is complete and ready for final Architect review. C. Upon completion of all work, and as a condition to receiving final payment, furnish to the Architect the following original, signed certificates and include copies of these certificates as part of the Operation and Maintenance manuals: 1. From the manufacturer's authorized representative, stating that authorized factory engineers have inspected and tested the operation of their respective equipment and found same to be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's requirements and to be in satisfactory operating condition. This certification shall be provided for all major equipment and for all complete systems. It is not required for other components unless specifically requested by the Architect. 2. Certificates of inspections, letters and notices from the appropriate government-authorized inspectional authorities stating that all portions of the work (indicate trade and responsibility) have been inspected and are installed in conformance with the applicable codes, laws, ordinances and referenced standards. If non-conformance notices are received, include the re-inspection certificate, letter of explanation, etc. as required to indicate complete conformance. Provide written evidence of all variations, exceptions, variances, etc. given by the inspectors. 3. Certificate from the Installing firm responsible for the work (indicate trade and responsibility) signed by an authorized officer or owner of the Firm and the Foreman or Project Manager in charge, stating that to the best of the signer's knowledge and belief that the project (indicate project name and address) has been installed in compliance with the Contract Plans, Specifications and Addenda, and all applicable codes and laws, ordinances and referenced standards. Where subcontractors perform a portion of the work of this Section, include certificates from them. D. Should Architect observe and find Work incomplete, the review will be promptly suspended and written notification will be provided through the General Contractor. E. Complete Work, remedy deficiencies and send a second certification of final completion. F. Architect shall, upon receipt of a second certification of completion, make a second review and provide notification in writing through the General Contractor, listing observed deficiencies. G. When Architect finds work complete, close-out submittals will be considered. END OF SECTION SECTION 26 05 00 COMMON WORK RESULTS FOR ELECTRICAL PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SUMMARY A. Section Includes: 1. Sleeves for raceways and cables. 2. Sleeve seals. 3. Grout. 4. Access floor seals 5. Fire rated sleeves 6. Watertight Seals 7. Smoke and Firestopping Seals 8. Expansion/Deflection Fittings 9. Conduit sealing bushings 10. Cable supports 11. Acoustical Sealant 12. Caulking 13. ARC/Fire Proofing Materials 14. Cable Ties 15. Measure Pulling Tape 1.2 RELATED WORK A. Section 26 00 10 – Basic electrical requirements, is an integral part of this section. Requirements and work indicated in 26 00 10 are not repeated in this Section. B. Division 07 specification sections. 1.3 COORDINATION A. Coordinate work under provisions indicated in Section 26 00 10. 1.4 QUALIFICATIONS / QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Conform to requirements indicated in Section 26 00 10. 1.5 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS 1.7 EXTRA MATERIALS A.  Conform to requirements indicated in Section 26 00 10.  1.6  SUBMITTALS  A.  Submit as required here in and under Section 26 00 10.  A. Furnish under provisions indicated in Section 26 00 10. B. Provide the following additional materials: None 1.8 PROJECT RECORD DOCUMENTS A. Submit under provisions indicated in Section 26 00 10. 1.9 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE DATA A. Submit under provisions indicated in Section 26 00 10. 1.10 WARRANTY A. Provide under provisions indicated in Section 26 00 10. 1.11 LEED / SUSTAINABILITY A. Conform to requirements indicated in Section 26 00 10. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 SLEEVES FOR RACEWAYS AND CABLES A. Steel Pipe Sleeves: ASTM A 53/A 53M, Type E, Grade B, Schedule 40, galvanized steel, plain ends. B. Cast-Iron Pipe Sleeves: Cast or fabricated "wall pipe," equivalent to ductile-iron pressure pipe, with plain ends and integral waterstop, unless otherwise indicated. C. Sleeves for Rectangular Openings: Galvanized sheet steel. 1. Minimum Metal Thickness: a. For sleeve cross-section rectangle perimeter less than 50 inches (1270 b. mm) and no side more than 16 inches (400 mm), thickness shall be c. 0.052 inch (1.3 mm). d. For sleeve cross-section rectangle perimeter equal to, or more than, 50 inches (1270 mm) and 1 or more sides equal to, or more than, 16 inches (400 mm), thickness shall be 0.138 inch (3.5 mm). 2.2 SLEEVE SEALS A. Description: Modular sealing device, designed for field assembly, to fill annular space between sleeve and raceway or cable. 1. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products of one of the following: a. O.Z. Gedney b. Advance Products & Systems, Inc. c. Calpico, Inc. d. Metraflex Co. e. Pipeline Seal and Insulator, Inc. f. Substitutions: Under provisions of Section 26 00 10. 2. Sealing Elements: EPDM interlocking links shaped to fit surface of cable or conduit. Include type and number required for material and size of raceway or cable. 3. Pressure Plates: Carbon steel. Include two for each sealing element. 4. Connecting Bolts and Nuts: Carbon steel with corrosion-resistant coating of length required to secure pressure plates to sealing elements. Include one for each sealing element. 2.3 GROUT A. Nonmetallic, Shrinkage-Resistant Grout: ASTM C 1107, factory-packaged, nonmetallic aggregate grout, noncorrosive, nonstaining, mixed with water to consistency suitable for application and a 30-minute working time. B. Polywater® InstaGrout™ Sealant creates a barrier to protect electrical structures and equipment. It keeps out moisture and stops insects, snakes and rodents from tunneling through earthen gaps into the enclosure. The strong, lightweight seal withstands freeze-thaw cycles and environmental extremes. It is compatible with cable jacket materials and will not corrode metal. Polywater® InstaGrout™ Sealant is a two-part system packaged in pre-measured quantities for easy, onsite mixing. The repair compound flows and expands around complex conduit stub-ups. It adheres to metals, plastics, wood, and concrete. InstaGrout™ self-levels and covers uneven dirt and sand base material. The result is a continuous barrier created from a convenient liquid system. 2.4 ACCESS FLOOR SEALS A. Description: Brush type seal with brushes extending to cover the entire opening to provide a flexible air seal. 1. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements provide products of one of the following: a. Sealeze b. PDU Cables c. Koldlok d. Armour flex insulation-plenum rated low smoke rating (25max) e. “The Plugg” foam barrier (www.theplugguc.com) f. Subzero “the cube” g. Gaphog h. Substitutions under provisions of Section 26 00 10. B. Description: Solid pliable seal to seal off openings around conduit or conductors. 1. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products of one of the following: a. Compressible material. b. Armour flex sheet material – plenum rated, low smoke (25 max) c. Nelson tan caulking fire seal putty. d. Substitutions under provisions of Section 26 00 10. 2.5 FIRE RATED SLEEVE A. Description: Pre filled fire barriers. 1. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements provide products of one of the following: a. 3M Quick pass fire barrier b. Specified Technologies Inc. (STI) c. Roxtec d. Substitutions: Under provisions of Section 26 00 10. 2.6 WATERTIGHT SEALS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements provide products of one of the following: 1. O-Z Gedney Type WSK or FSK (if only one side is accessible) 2. Crouse Hinds 3. Appleton 4. Polywater Corporation FST foam sealant inside conduits. 5. Substitutions: or equal, under provisions of Section 26 00 10. B. The foam duct sealant shall be FST™Sealant. The foam duct sealant shall be a two part “blown” urethane foam with 98% closed cell content. The foam duct sealant shall have a compressive strength of 300 pounds (ASTM D1691), and shall have a tensile strength of 250 pounds (ASTM D1623). The foam duct sealant shall have a flexural strength of 450 pounds(ASTM D790), and shall withstand temperatures from -20° F to 200° F. The foam duct sealant shall be chemically resistant to gasoline, oils, dilute acids and bases. The foam duct sealant shall be available as a kit suitable for sealing various sized ducts. The product shall foam and react in five to ten minutes at 70° F. When installed, the sealant shall be capable of holding 7.25 psi air pressure continuously (equivalent of 16.4 feet water-head pressure). 2.7 SMOKE AND FIRESTOPPING SEALS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements provide products of one of the following: 1. Specified Technologies Inc 2. 3M. 3. Protective Coatings, Inc. 4. Carborundum Company. 5. Substitutions: or equal, under provisions of Section 26 00 10. 2.8 EXPANSION/DEFLECTION FITTINGS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements provide products of one of the following: 1. O-Z Gedney – DX for up to 3/4 inch movement in any direction. 2. Crouse-Hinds – XD for up to 3/4 inch movement in any direction. 3. Spring City Electrical Mfg. Co. -Type DF for up to 3/4 inch movement in any direction. 4. Manufacturer of raceways including but not limited to busway, cable tray, wireway, fiber guide, etc. 5. Substitutions: or equal, under provisions of Section 26 00 10. B. Where greater movement than 3/4 inch is required provide fittings or combination of fittings that allow movement in all directions. Fittings shall allow expansion of 3 inches, compression of 3 inches and deflection of 2 inches. 2.9 CONDUIT SEALING BUSHINGS A. Description: Seals interior of conduit against fluids and gases. a. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements provide products of one of the followingO.Z. Gedney type CSB b. Substitutions: or equal, under provisions of Section 26 00 10. B. Description: Seals around exterior of conduit against fluid and gas. 1. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements provide products of one of the following: a. O.Z. Gedney type CSM b. Substitutions: or equal, under provisions of Section 26 00 10. 2.10 CABLE SUPPORTS A. Description: Fitting with wedge type cable support for cables 600V or less installed vertically 1. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements provide products of one of the following: a. O.Z. Gedney one piece plus type ‘S’ – indoors b. O.Z. Gedney type CMT – outdoors c. Substitutions: or equal, under provisions of Section 26 00 10. B. Description: Fitting with wedge type cable support for cables over 1000V installed vertically. 1. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements provide products of one of the following: a. O.Z. Gedney multi-segment plus type “R” – indoors b. O.Z. Gedney type CMT – outdoors c. Substitutions: or equal, under provisions of Section 26 00 10. 2.11 ACOUSTICAL SEALANT A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements provide products of one of the following: 1. D.A.P. 2. Pecora -Type BR-96 3. Fremco 4. U.S.G. 5. Substitution: or equal, under provisions indicated in Section 26 00 10. B. Sealants for acoustical purposes shall be silicone non-setting sealants. 2.12 CAULKING A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements provide products of one of the following: 1. D.A.P. 2. Pecora – Type BR-96 3. Fremco 4. U.S.G. 5. Substitution: or equal, under provisions indicated in Section 26 00 10. B. Sealants shall be low VOC 20 year silicone non-setting sealants. 2.13 ARC/FIRE PROOFING MATERIALS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products of one of the following: 1. Plymouth 53 plyarc with 77 ply glass. 2. 3M Sotch 77 with Sotch 69 glass ply cloth. 3. D.A.P. 4. Pecora -Type BR-96 5. Fremco 6. U.S.G. 7. Substitution: or equal, under provisions indicated in Section 26 00 10. B. Cable arc-proof type shall be flexible, conformation organic fabric, coated one side with a flame retardant flexible elastomer, self-extinguishing, with the following minimum properties: 1. Thickness ASTM D100, 0.76mm. 2. Intumescent to 0.3 inch (8mm) thick. 3. Compatible with cable jacket. C. Type for first course on metal objects: 10 mil (250 micrometer) thick, corrosion-protective, moisture resistant, PVC pipe wrapping tape. D. Glass cloth tape: Pressure sensitive adhesive type, . inch (13 mm) wide. 2.14 CABLE TIES A. General-Purpose Cable Ties: Fungus inert, self extinguishing, one piece, self locking, Type 6/6 nylon. 1. Minimum Width: 3/16 inch (5 mm). 2. Tensile Strength at 73 deg F (23 deg C), According to ASTM D 638: 12,000 psi (82.7 MPa). 3. Temperature Range: Minus 40 to plus 185 deg F (Minus 40 to plus 85 deg C). 4. Color: Black except where used for color-coding. B. UV-Stabilized Cable Ties: Fungus inert, designed for continuous exposure to exterior sunlight, self extinguishing, one piece, self locking, Type 6/6 nylon. 1. Minimum Width: 3/16 inch (5 mm). 2. Tensile Strength at 73 deg F (23 deg C), According to ASTM D 638: 12,000 psi (82.7 MPa). 3. Temperature Range: Minus 40 to plus 185 deg F (Minus 40 to plus 85 deg C). 4. Color: Black. C. Plenum-Rated Cable Ties: Self extinguishing, UV stabilized, one piece, self locking. 1. Minimum Width: 3/16 inch (5 mm). 2. Tensile Strength at 73 deg F (23 deg C), According to ASTM D 638: 7000 psi (48.2 MPa). 3. UL 94 Flame Rating: 94V-0. 4. Temperature Range: Minus 50 to plus 284 deg F (Minus 46 to plus 140 deg C). 5. Color: Black. 2.15 MEASURE/PULLING TAPE A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements provide products of one of the following: 1. Greenlee Tool Division 2. Substitution: or equal under provisions indicated in Section 26 00 10. B. Polyester measure pulling tape. Durable and stretch resistant. 1. .” width – average breaking strength 1250 lbs. 2. .” width – average breaking strength 2500 lbs. C. Factory lubricated to reduce burn through. D. Easy to read footage markings for quick and accurate measurements. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 COMMON REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION A. Comply with NECA 1. B. Measure indicated mounting heights to bottom of unit for suspended items and to center of unit for wall-mounting items. C. Headroom Maintenance: If mounting heights or other location criteria are not indicated, arrange and install components and equipment to provide maximum possible headroom consistent with these requirements. D. Equipment: Install to facilitate service, maintenance, and repair or replacement of components of both electrical equipment and other nearby installations. Connect in such a way as to facilitate future disconnecting with minimum interference with other items in the vicinity. E. Right of Way: Give way to piping systems installed at a required slope. F. Seal all openings to prevent air transfer between spaces. Provide fire and smoke rated seals where required or indicated. G. Provide grout, sealant or fittings for all openings around raceways penetrating walls, floors, or from underground as specified herein, required by the utility or required by code. Including padmount transformers, exterior equipment, equipment with underground services, etc. Seal keep moisture, gasses and rodents out of the equipment. 3.2 SLEEVE INSTALLATION FOR ELECTRICAL PENETRATIONS A. Penetrations occur when raceways, cables, wireways, cable trays, or busways penetrate floors, concrete slabs, concrete or masonry walls, fire-rated floor and wall assemblies, acoustical or full height walls. B. Concrete Slabs and Walls: Install sleeves for penetrations unless core-drilled holes or formed openings are used. Install sleeves during erection of slabs and walls. C. Use pipe sleeves unless penetration arrangement requires rectangular sleeved opening. D. Fire-Rated Assemblies: Install sleeves for penetrations of fire-rated floor and wall assemblies unless openings compatible with firestop system used are fabricated during construction of floor or wall. E. Cut sleeves to length for mounting flush with both surfaces of walls. F. Extend sleeves installed in floors 3 inches (75 mm) above finished floor level. G. Size pipe sleeves to provide 1/4-inch (6.4-mm) annular clear space between sleeve and raceway or cable, unless indicated otherwise, required by fire or smoke seal product, or unless seismic criteria require different clearance. H. Seal space outside of non-fire-rated, non-watertight sleeves with grout for penetrations of concrete and masonry and with approved joint compound for gypsum board assemblies. 1. Promptly pack grout solidly between sleeve and wall so no voids remain. Tool exposed surfaces smooth; protect grout while curing. I. Interior Penetrations of Non-Fire-Rated Walls and Floors: Seal annular space between sleeve and cable tray, busway, raceway or cable, using joint sealant appropriate for size, depth, and location of joint. Comply with requirements herein and in Division 07 Section "Joint Sealants.". J. Fire-Rated-Assembly Penetrations: Maintain indicated fire rating of walls, partitions, ceilings, and floors at cable tray, busway, raceway and cable penetrations. Install sleeves and seal penetration sleeves with firestop materials. Comply with requirements in Division 07 Section "Penetration Firestopping." K. Roof-Penetration Sleeves: Seal penetration of individual raceways and cables with flexible boot-type flashing units applied in coordination with roofing work. L. Aboveground, Exterior-Wall Penetrations: Seal penetrations using steel pipe sleeves and mechanical sleeve seals. Select sleeve size to allow for 1-inch (25-mm) annular clear space between pipe and sleeve for installing mechanical sleeve seals. M. Underground, Exterior-Wall Penetrations: Install cast-iron pipe sleeves. Size sleeves to allow for 1-inch (25-mm) annular clear space between raceway or cable and sleeve for installing mechanical sleeve seals. 3.3 SLEEVE-SEAL INSTALLATION A. Install to seal exterior wall penetrations. B. Use type and number of sealing elements recommended by manufacturer for raceway or cable material and size. Position raceway or cable in center of sleeve. Assemble mechanical sleeve seals and install in annular space between raceway or cable and sleeve. Tighten bolts against pressure plates that cause sealing elements to expand and make watertight seal. 3.4 FIRESTOPPING A. Apply firestopping to penetrations of fire-rated floor and wall assemblies for electrical installations to restore original fire-resistance rating of assembly. Firestopping materials and installation requirements are specified herein and in Division 07 Section "Penetration Firestopping" and in this Section. 3.5 INSTALLATION OF SEALS A. Watertight Seals 1. Conduits entering from the exterior or below grade shall have watertight fittings on the outside and on the inside of the conduitConduits penetrating walls above grade shall be installed in sleeves. Seal with foam and caulking around sleeve and conduit to ensure a watertight and air tight seal. 2. Fittings on the outside of the conduit shall be O-Z Gedney type FSK or approved equal. Provide type WSK if penetration is within two feet of the high water table. Provide grounding attachment. a. Fittings on the inside of the conduit shall be O-Z Gedney type CSBI or approved equal. Provide type CSBG if penetration is within two feet of the high water table. Provide a blank fitting to seal spare or empty conduits. b. O-Z Gedney type CSM fitting may be used when sealing within a sleeve or cored hole. B. Environmental Seals 1. Provide seals on raceways exposed to widely different temperatures, as in refrigerating or cold storage areas or when penetrating the building envelope. Install raceway seal to prevent circulation of air from warmer to colder sections through the raceway. 2. Provide seal under device plates for devices mounted or walls between conditioned and non-conditioned spaces, in computer rooms, rooms with gaseous fire suppression systems or clean rooms. 3. Seal air tight with caulking and insulation around light fixtures and equipment installed in exterior soffits. 4. Provide seals on raceways entering or leaving computer rooms, data halls and pressure-controlled rooms. Seal raceways air tight with pliable non-hardening material such as duct seal or an environmental seal fitting. Provide seal at panel, PDU or equipment connection. Provide threaded caps on unused conduits. C. Acoustical Seals 1. Provide acoustical sealant around penetrations through sound-sensitive areas such as toilet rooms, conference rooms, electrical or mechanical rooms, elevator rooms, training rooms, etc. Provide at any wall where Architect or mechanical specifies sound attenuation provisions. D. Firestopping Seals 1. Penetrations through fire-resistant-rated walls, partitions, floors or ceilings shall be fire stopped using approved methods and NRTL-listed products to maintain the fire resistance rating. Follow all listing and manufacturers recommendations and requirements. 2. Installation restrictions of the listing agencies shall be strictly adhered to (e.g. 24 inch (610 mm) minimum horizontal separation between boxes on opposite sides of the wall, maximum square inch opening on wall. 3. Fire stopping in sleeves or in areas that may require the addition or modification of installed cables or raceways shall be soft, pliable, non-hardening fire-stop putty. Putty shall be water resistant and intumescent. 4. Fire stopping in locations not likely to require frequent modifications shallbe a NRTL-listed putty, caulk or mortar to meet the required fire resistance rating. 5. Box penetrations into a fire rated wall or shaft shall have a fire stopping pad installed on the back of the box. 6. Fire stopping of cable trays or busways through walls shall be with fire rated sleeves with intumescent material, non-hardening putty or with seal bags on tap, below and on sides of trays. 7. Fire stopping of plastic pipes shall be accomplished by using a collar specifically listed for the use. 8. Installation methods shall conform to a UL fire stopping system. 9. Provide gas tight sealing fitting and compound at each enclosure around conductors with intumescent fire protection insulation 10. Provide Specified Technologies SpecSeal fire stop plugs for conduit sleeves. E. Explosion Proof seals 1. Provide seals where required by code. 2. Fill seal with sealant following manufacturer’s recommendation being careful to spread conductors so as to allow seal to flow around all conductors. 3.6 EXPANSION/DEFLECTION FITTINGS A. Install bonding ground wire across fitting. B. Install as recommended by manufacturer. Allow for expansion, contraction or deflection after installation. C. Install on raceways rising from underground where exposed to ground movement or extreme temperature variation or freezing. D. Install on PVC conduit installations 100 feet or longer. E. Install on raceways subject to varying environmental conditions such an exterior/interior, air conditioning/non-air conditioned, refrigerated/non-refrigerated spaces, etc. F. Install where raceways cable trays or busways cross building expansion or seismic joints. Provide two expansion deflection fittings, one on each side of the joint or wall, with a continuous piece of raceway or busway across the joint. G. Install where raceways cable trays or busways pass from one building to another. 3.7 WATER DAMS A. Provide three inch high water dams across floor penetrations that are not water tight and where there are openings allow the passage of water such as for busway on cable tray penetrations, where seismic or other requirements leave openings around penetrations. 3.8 ARC PROOFING A. Unless otherwise indicated, at locations with multiple feeders in manholes, hand holes or pits under equipment arc proof feeder conductors at locations not protected by conduit, direct burial, or termination materials. In addition to arc-proofing tape manufacturer’s written instructions, apply arc proofing as follows: 1. Clean cable sheath. 2. Wrap metallic cable components with 10-mil (250-micrometer) pipe-wrapping tape. 3. Smooth surface contours with electrical insulation putty. 4. Apply arc-proofing tape in one half-lapped layer with coated side toward cable. 5. Band arc proofing tape with one-inch (25mm) wide bands of half-lapped, adhesive, glass cloth tape 2 inches (50mm) o.c. 6. Extend arc proofing one-inch (25mm) into duct. 3.9 MEASURE/PULLING TAPE A. Provide measure/pulling tape in all empty raceways. 1. Provide .” width, 1250 lbs rate in innterducts or raceways 2” or less in diameter. 2. Provide .” width, 2500 lbs rated in all other raceways. B. Provide 12 inches minimum at each end. Secure tape so it will not fall back into raceway. C. Install tape after cleaning underground raceway installations. END OF SECTION SECTION 26 05 13 MEDIUM-VOLTAGE CABLES PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SUMMARY A. Section Includes: 1. Cables. 2. Connectors. 3. Solid terminations. 4. Separable insulated connectors. 5. Splice kits. 6. Medium-voltage tapes. 7. Arc-proofing materials. 8. Fault indicators. B. Related Requirements: 1. Section 26 00 10 "Basic Electrical Requirements" for additional abbreviations, definitions, submittals, qualifications, testing agencies, and other Project requirements applicable to Work specified in this Section. 1.2 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For each type of cable. Include splices and terminations for cables and cable accessories. 1.3 INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS A. Coordination Drawings: Indicate location of each cable, splice, and termination. B. Material Certificates: For each type of cable and accessory. C. Design Data: Cable pulling calculations, including conduit size and fill percentage, pulling tensions, cable sidewall pressure, jam probability, voltage drop, and ground wire sizing for each cable. D. Source quality-control reports. E. Field quality-control reports. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 SYSTEM DESCRIPTION A. Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. B. Comply with IEEE C2 and NFPA 70. C. Source Limitations: Obtain cables and accessories from single source from single manufacturer. 2.2 CABLES A. Manufacturer 1. Southwire 2. Okonite 3. Substitutions: or equal provisions of Section 26 00 10 B. Cable Type: Type MV 105. C. Conductor Insulation: Ethylene-propylene rubber. 1. Voltage Rating: 25 kV. 2. Insulation Thickness: 133 percent insulation level. D. Conductor: Copper. E. Comply with UL 1072, AEIC CS8. F. Conductor Stranding: Compact round, concentric lay, Class B. G. Shielding: Copper tape, helically applied over semiconducting insulation shield. H. Shielding and Jacket: Corrugated copper drain wires embedded in extruded, chlorinated, polyethylene jacket. 2.3 CONNECTORS A. Manufacturers 1. 3M 2. Hubbell 3. Burndy B. Substitutions: or equal provisions of Section 26 00 10Comply with ANSI C119.4 for connectors between aluminum conductors or for connections between aluminum to copper conductors. C. Copper-Conductor Connectors: Copper barrel crimped connectors. 2.4 SOLID TERMINATIONS A. Manufacturers 1. 3M 2. Hubbell 3. Burndy 4. Substitutions: or equal provisions of Section 26 00 10 5. Cold-shrink sheath seal kit with preformed sleeve openings sized for cable and insulated conductors. B. Shielded-Cable Terminations: Comply with the following classes of IEEE 48. Insulation class shall be equivalent to that of cable. Include shield ground strap for shielded cable terminations. 1. Class 1 Terminations: a. Modular type, furnished as a kit, with stress-relief tube; multiple, molded-silicone-rubber, insulator modules; shield ground strap; and compression-type connector. 2. Class 2 Terminations, Indoors: Kit with stress-relief tube, nontracking insulator tube, shield ground strap, and compression-type connector. Include silicone-rubber tape; cold-shrink-rubber sleeve; or heat-shrink, plastic-sleeve moisture seal for end of insulation whether or not supplied with kits. 3. Class 3 Terminations: Kit with stress cone and compression-type connector. 2.5 SEPARABLE INSULATED CONNECTORS A. Description: Modular system, complying with IEEE 386, with disconnecting, single-pole, cable terminators and with matching, stationary, plug-in, dead-front terminals designed for cable voltage and for sealing against moisture. B. Manufacturers 1. 3M 2. Hubbell 3. Burndy 4. Substitutions: or equal provisions of Section 26 00 10 C. Terminations at Distribution Points: Modular type, consisting of terminators installed on cables and modular, dead-front, terminal junctions for interconnecting cables. D. Load-Break Cable Terminators: Elbow-type units with 200 A load make/break and continuous-current rating; coordinated with insulation diameter, conductor size, andmaterial of cable being terminated. Include test point on terminator body that is capacitance coupled. E. Dead-Break Cable Terminators: Elbow-type unit with 600 A continuous-current rating; designed for de-energized disconnecting and connecting; coordinated with insulation diameter, conductor size, and material of cable being terminated. Include test point on terminator body that is capacitance coupled. F. Dead-Front Terminal Junctions: Modular bracket-mounted groups of dead-front stationary terminals that mate and match with above cable terminators. Two-, three-, or four-terminal units as indicated, with fully rated, insulated, watertight conductor connection between terminals and complete with grounding lug, manufacturer's standard accessory stands, stainless steel mounting brackets, and attaching hardware. 1. Protective Cap: Insulating, electrostatic-shielding, water-sealing cap with drain wire. 2. Portable Feed-Through Accessory: Two-terminal, dead-front junction arranged for removable mounting on accessory stand of stationary terminal junction. 3. Grounding Kit: Jumpered elbows, portable feed-through accessory units, protective caps, test rods suitable for concurrently grounding three phases of feeders, and carrying case. 4. Standoff Insulator: Portable, single dead-front terminal for removable mounting on accessory stand of stationary terminal junction. Insulators suitable for fully insulated isolation of energized cable-elbow terminator. G. Test-Point Fault Indicators: Applicable current-trip ratings and arranged for installation in test points of load-break separable connectors, and complete with self-resetting indicators capable of being installed with shotgun hot stick and tested with test tool. H. Tool Set: Shotgun hot stick with energized terminal indicator, fault-indicator test tool, and carrying case. 2.6 SPLICE KITS A. Description: For connecting medium voltage cables; type as recommended by cable or splicing kit manufacturer for the application. B. Manufacturers 1. 3M 2. Hubbell 3. Burndy 4. Substitutions: or equal provisions of Section 26 00 10 C. Standard: Comply with IEEE 404. D. Splicing Products: As recommended, in writing, by splicing kit manufacturer for specific sizes, materials, ratings, and configurations of cable conductors. Include all components required for complete splice, with detailed instructions. 1. Premolded, cold-shrink-rubber, in-line splicing kit. 2.7 MEDIUM-VOLTAGE TAPES A. Description: Electrical grade, insulating tape rated for medium voltage application. B. Manufacturers 1. 3M 2. Hubbell 3. Burndy 4. Substitutions: or equal provisions of Section 26 00 10 C. Ethylene/propylene rubber-based, 30 mil splicing tape, rated for 130 deg C operation. Minimum 3/4 inch wide. 2.8 ARC-PROOFING MATERIALS A. Description: Fire retardant, providing arc flash protection. B. Manufacturers 1. 3M 2. Hubbell 3. Burndy 4. Substitutions: or equal provisions of Section 26 00 10 C. Arc-Proofing Tape: Fireproof tape, flexible, conformable, intumescent to 0.3 inch thick, and compatible with cable jacket. 2.9 FAULT INDICATORS A. Indicators: Automatically reset fault indicator with inrush restraint feature, arranged to clamp to cable sheath and provide a display after a fault has occurred in cable. Instrument shall not be affected by heat, moisture, and corrosive conditions and shall be recommended by manufacturer for installation conditions. 2.10 SOURCE QUALITY CONTROL A. Test and inspect cables according to ICEA S-97-682 before shipping. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 INSTALLATION A. Install cables according to IEEE 576.Proof conduits prior to conductor installation by passing a wire brush mandrel and then a rubber duct swab through the conduit. Separate the wire brush and the rubber swab by 48 inches on the pull rope. 1. Wire Brush Mandrel: Consists of a length of brush approximately the size of the conduit inner diameter with stiff steel bristles and an eye on each end for attaching the pull ropes. If an obstruction is felt, pull the brush back and forth repeatedly to break up the obstruction. 2. Rubber Duct Swab: Consists of a series of rubber discs approximately the size of the conduit inner diameter on a length of steel cable with an eye on each end for attaching the pull ropes. Pull the rubber duct swab through the duct to extract loose debris from the duct. B. Pull Conductors: Do not exceed manufacturer's recommended maximum pulling tensions and sidewall pressure values. 1. Where necessary, use manufacturer-approved pulling compound or lubricant that does not deteriorate conductor or insulation. 2. Use pulling means, including fish tape, cable, rope, and basket-weave cable grips, that do not damage cables and raceways. Do not use rope hitches for pulling attachment to cable. 3. Use pull-in guides, cable feeders, and draw-in protectors as required to protect cables during installation. 4. Do not pull cables with ends unsealed. Seal cable ends with rubber tape. C. Install exposed cables parallel and perpendicular to surfaces of exposed structural members and follow surface contours where possible. D. Support cables according to Section 26 05 29 "Hangers and Supports for Electrical Systems." E. Install direct-buried cables on leveled and tamped bed of 3 inch thick, clean sand. Separate cables crossing other cables or piping by a minimum of 2 inch of tamped earth, plus an additional 2 inch of sand. Install permanent markers at ends of cable runs, changes in direction, and buried splices. F. Install "buried-cable" warning tape 12 inch below grade. G. In manholes, handholes, pull boxes, junction boxes, and cable vaults, train cables around walls by the longest route from entry to exit; support cables at intervals adequate to prevent sag. H. Install sufficient cable length to remove cable ends under pulling grips. Remove length of conductor damaged during pulling. I. Install cable splices at pull points and elsewhere as indicated; use standard kits. Use dead-front separable watertight connectors in manholes and other locations subject to water infiltration. J. Install terminations at ends of conductors, and seal multiconductor cable ends with standard kits. K. Install separable insulated-connector components as follows: 1. Protective Cap: At each terminal junction, with one on each terminal to which no feeder is indicated to be connected. 2. Portable Feed-Through Accessory: At each terminal junction, with one on each terminal. 3. Standoff Insulator: At each terminal junction, with one on each terminal. L. Arc Proofing: Unless otherwise indicated, arc proof medium-voltage cable at locations not protected by conduit, cable tray, direct burial, or termination materials. In addition to arc-proofing tape manufacturer's written instructions, apply arc proofing as follows: 1. Clean cable sheath. 2. Wrap metallic cable components with 10 mil pipe-wrapping tape. 3. Smooth surface contours with electrical insulation putty. 4. Apply arc-proofing tape in one half-lapped layer with coated side toward cable. 5. Band arc-proofing tape with two layers of 1 inch wide half-lapped, adhesive, glass-cloth tape at each end of the arc-proof tape. M. Seal around cables passing through fire-rated elements according to Section 07 84 13 "Penetration Firestopping." N. Install fault indicators on each phase where indicated. O. Ground shields of shielded cable at terminations, splices, and separable insulated connectors. Ground metal bodies of terminators, splices, cable and separable insulated-connector fittings, and hardware. P. Identify cables according to Section 26 05 53 "Identification for Electrical Systems." Identify phase and circuit number of each conductor at each splice, termination, pull point, and junction box. Arrange identification so that it is unnecessary to move the cable or conductor to read the identification. 3.2 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Tests and Inspections: 1. Perform each visual and mechanical inspection and electrical test stated in NETA ATS. Certify compliance with test parameters. 2. After installing medium-voltage cables and before electrical circuitry has been energized, test for compliance with requirements. 3. Perform direct-current High Potential test of each new conductor according to NETA ATS, Ch. 7.3.3. Do not exceed cable manufacturer's recommended maximum test voltage. 4. Perform Partial Discharge test of each new conductor according to NETA ATS, Ch. 7.3.3 and to test equipment manufacturer's recommendations. B. Perform Dissipation Factor test of each new conductor according to NETA ATS, Ch. 7.3.3 and to test equipment manufacturer's recommendations. Medium-voltage cables will be considered defective if they do not pass tests and inspections. C. Prepare test and inspection reports. END OF SECTION SECTION 26 05 19 LOW-VOLTAGE ELECTRICAL POWER CONDUCTORS AND CABLES PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Section Includes: 1. Copper building wire rated 600 V or less. 2. Aluminum building wire rated 600 V or less. 3. Metal-clad cable, Type MC, rated 600 V or less. 4. Fire-alarm wire and cable. 5. Connectors, splices, and terminations rated 600 V and less. B. Related Requirements: 1. Section 26 05 13 "Medium-Voltage Cables" for single-conductor and multiconductor cables, cable splices, and terminations for electrical distribution systems with 601 to 35,000 V. 2. Section 26 05 23 "Control-Voltage Electrical Power Cables" for control systems communications cables and Classes 1, 2, and 3 control cables. 1.3 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For each type of product. B. Product Schedule: Indicate type, use, location, and termination locations. 1.4 INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS A. Field quality-control reports. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 COPPER BUILDING WIRE A. Description: Flexible, insulated and uninsulated, drawn copper current-carrying conductor with an overall insulation layer or jacket, or both, rated 600 V or less. B. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Alpha Wire Company. 2. American Bare Conductor. 3. Cerro Wire LLC. 4. General Cable Technologies Corporation. 5. Okonite Company (The). 6. Southwire Company. 7. WESCO. C. Standards: 1. Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and use. 2. RoHS compliant. 3. Conductor and Cable Marking: Comply with wire and cable marking according to UL's "Wire and Cable Marking and Application Guide." D. Conductors: Copper, complying with ASTM B 3 for bare annealed copper and with ASTM B 8 for stranded conductors. E. Conductor Insulation: 1. Type NM: Comply with UL 83 and UL 719. 2. Type THHN and Type THWN-2: Comply with UL 83. 3. Type XHHW-2: Comply with UL 44. 2.2 ALUMINUM BUILDING WIRE A. Description: Flexible, insulated and uninsulated, drawn aluminum current-carrying conductor with an overall insulation layer or jacket, or both, rated 600 V or less. B. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Alpha Wire Company. 2. American Bare Conductor. 3. Cerro Wire LLC. 4. General Cable Technologies Corporation. 5. Okonite Company (The). 6. Southwire Company. 7. WESCO. C. Standards: 1. Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and use. 2. RoHS compliant. 3. Conductor and Cable Marking: Comply with wire and cable marking according to UL's "Wire and Cable Marking and Application Guide." D. Conductors: Aluminum, complying with ASTM B 800 and ASTM B 801. E. Conductor Insulation: 1. Type SE: Comply with UL 854. 2. Type THHN and Type THWN-2: Comply with UL 83. 3. Type XHHW-2: Comply with UL 44. 2.3 METAL-CLAD CABLE, TYPE MC A. Description: A factory assembly of one or more current-carrying insulated conductors in an overall metallic sheath. B. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Alpha Wire Company. 2. American Bare Conductor. 3. General Cable Technologies Corporation. 4. Okonite Company (The). 5. Southwire Company. 6. WESCO. C. Standards: 1. Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and use. 2. Comply with UL 1569. 3. RoHS compliant. 4. Conductor and Cable Marking: Comply with wire and cable marking according to UL's "Wire and Cable Marking and Application Guide." D. Circuits: 1. Single 20 Amp, 120 Volt circuit. 2. Power-Limited Fire-Alarm Circuits: Comply with UL 1424. E. Conductors: Copper, complying with ASTM B 3 for bare annealed copper and with ASTM B 8 for stranded conductors. F. Ground Conductor: Insulated. G. Conductor Insulation: 1. Type TFN/THHN/THWN-2: Comply with UL 83. H. Armor: Steel, interlocked. 2.4 FIRE-ALARM WIRE AND CABLE A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Allied Wire & Cable Inc. 2. Genesis Cable Products; Honeywell International, Inc. 3. Superior Essex Inc. 4. West Penn Wire. B. Signaling Line Circuits: Twisted, shielded pair, not less than No. 18 AWG. 1. Circuit Integrity Cable: Twisted shielded pair, NFPA 70, Article 760, Classification CI, for power-limited fire-alarm signal service Type FPL. NRTL listed and labeled as complying with UL 1424 and UL 2196 for a two-hour rating. C. Non-Power-Limited Circuits: Solid-copper conductors with 600-V rated, 75 deg C, color-coded insulation, and complying with requirements in UL 2196 for a two-hour rating. 1. Low-Voltage Circuits: No. 16 AWG, minimum, in pathway. 2. Line-Voltage Circuits: No. 12 AWG, minimum, in pathway. 3. Multiconductor Armored Cable: NFPA 70, Type MC, copper conductors, Type TFN/THHN conductor insulation, copper drain wire, copper armor with outer jacket with red identifier stripe, NTRL listed for fire-alarm and cable tray installation, plenum rated. 2.5 CONNECTORS AND SPLICES A. Description: Factory-fabricated connectors, splices, and lugs of size, ampacity rating, material, type, and class for application and service indicated; listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and use. B. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. 3M Electrical Products. 2. Gardner Bender. 3. Hubbell Power Systems, Inc. 4. Ideal Industries, Inc. 5. ILSCO. 6. Thomas & Betts Corporation; A Member of the ABB Group. C. Jacketed Cable Connectors: For steel and aluminum jacketed cables, zinc die-cast with set screws, designed to connect conductors specified in this Section. D. Lugs: One piece, seamless, designed to terminate conductors specified in this Section. 1. Material: Aluminum. 2. Type: Two hole with long barrels. 3. Termination: Compression. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 CONDUCTOR MATERIAL APPLICATIONS A. Feeders: Copper; solid for No. 10 AWG and smaller; stranded for No. 8 AWG and larger. B. Feeders: Copper for feeders smaller than No. 4 AWG; copper or aluminum for feeders No. 4 AWG and larger. Conductors shall be solid for No. 10 AWG and smaller; stranded for No. 8 AWG and larger. C. Branch Circuits: Copper. Solid or Stranded for No. 10 AWG and smaller; Stranded for No. 8 AWG and larger. D. Variable Frequency Controller Output Circuits Cable: Extra-flexible stranded for all sizes. E. Power-Limited Fire Alarm and Control: Solid for No. 12 AWG and smaller. 3.2 CONDUCTOR INSULATION AND MULTICONDUCTOR CABLE APPLICATIONS AND WIRING METHODS A. Service Entrance: Type XHHW-2, single conductors in raceway. B. Exposed Feeders: Type THHN/THWN-2, single conductors in raceway or Type XHHW-2, single conductors in raceway. C. Feeders Concealed in Ceilings, Walls, Partitions, and Crawlspaces: Type THHN/THWN-2, single conductors in raceway. D. Feeders Concealed in Concrete, below Slabs-on-Grade, and Underground: Type XHHW-2, single conductors in raceway. E. Exposed Branch Circuits, Including in Crawlspaces: Type THHN/THWN-2, single conductors in raceway. F. Branch Circuits Concealed in Ceilings, Walls, and Partitions: Type THHN/THWN-2, single conductors in raceway; or Metal-clad cable, Type MC; or Nonmetallic-sheathed cable, Type NM. See Drawing notes for more on use applicability. G. Branch Circuits Concealed in Concrete, below Slabs-on-Grade, and Underground: Type THHN/THWN-2, single conductors in raceway. H. Branch Circuits Installed below Raised Flooring: Type THHN/THWN-2, single conductors in raceway. I. Cord Drops and Portable Appliance Connections: Type SO, hard service cord with stainless-steel, wire-mesh, strain relief device at terminations to suit application. J. VFC Output Circuits: Type XHHW-2 in metal conduit. 3.3 INSTALLATION OF CONDUCTORS AND CABLES A. Conceal cables in finished walls, ceilings, and floors unless otherwise indicated. B. Complete raceway installation between conductor and cable termination points according to Section 26 05 33 "Raceways and Boxes for Electrical Systems" prior to pulling conductors and cables. C. Use manufacturer-approved pulling compound or lubricant where necessary; compound used must not deteriorate conductor or insulation. Do not exceed manufacturer's recommended maximum pulling tensions and sidewall pressure values. D. Use pulling means, including fish tape, cable, rope, and basket-weave wire/cable grips, that will not damage cables or raceway. E. Install exposed cables parallel and perpendicular to surfaces of exposed structural members, and follow surface contours where possible. F. Support cables according to Section 26 05 29 "Hangers and Supports for Electrical Systems." 3.4 INSTALLATION OF FIRE-ALARM WIRING A. Comply with NECA 1 and NFPA 72. B. Wiring Method: 1. Cables and pathways used for fire-alarm circuits, and equipment control wiring associated with fire-alarm system, may not contain any other wire or cable. 2. Where accessible and not subject to physical damage or exposed to open public view, Fire-Alarm circuits may be installed as exposed plenum cable in environmental airspaces, including plenum ceilings. In all other cases, all circuit and control wiring shall be installed in dedicated pathway systems, not shared with any other systems. 3. Signaling Line Circuits: Power-limited fire-alarm cables shall not be installed in the same cable or pathway as signaling line circuits. C. Wiring within Enclosures: Separate power-limited and non-power-limited conductors as recommended by manufacturer. Install conductors parallel with or at right angles to sides and back of the enclosure. Bundle, lace, and train conductors to terminal points with no excess. Connect conductors that are terminated, spliced, or interrupted in any enclosure associated with fire-alarm system to terminal blocks. Mark each terminal according to system's wiring diagrams. Make all connections with approved crimp-on terminal spade lugs, pressure-type terminal blocks, or plug connectors. D. Cable Taps: Use numbered terminal strips in junction, pull, and outlet boxes; cabinets; or equipment enclosures where circuit connections are made. E. Color-Coding: Color-code fire-alarm conductors differently from the normal building power wiring. Use one color-code for alarm circuit wiring and another for supervisory circuits. Color-code audible alarm-indicating circuits differently from alarm-initiating circuits. Use different colors for visible alarm-indicating devices. Paint fire-alarm system junction boxes and covers red. F. Risers: Where required for Class A circuits, install at least two vertical cable risers to serve the fire-alarm system. Separate risers in close proximity to each other with a minimum one-hour-rated wall, so the loss of one riser does not prevent receipt or transmission of signals from other floors or zones. 3.5 CONNECTIONS A. Tighten electrical connectors and terminals according to manufacturer's published torque-tightening values. If manufacturer's torque values are not indicated, use those specified in UL 486A-486B. B. Make splices, terminations, and taps that are compatible with conductor material and that possess equivalent or better mechanical strength and insulation ratings than unspliced conductors. 1. Use oxide inhibitor in each splice, termination, and tap for aluminum conductors. C. Wiring at Outlets: Install conductor at each outlet, with at least 6 inches (150 mm) of slack. D. Comply with requirements in Section 28 46 21.11 "Addressable Fire-Alarm Systems" for connecting, terminating, and identifying wires and cables. 3.6 IDENTIFICATION A. Identify and color-code conductors and cables according to Section 26 05 53 "Identification for Electrical Systems." B. Identify each spare conductor at each end with identity number and location of other end of conductor and identify as spare conductor. 3.7 SLEEVE AND SLEEVE-SEAL INSTALLATION FOR ELECTRICAL PENETRATIONS A. Install sleeves and sleeve seals at penetrations of exterior floor and wall assemblies. Comply with requirements in Section 26 05 44 "Sleeves and Sleeve Seals for Electrical Raceways and Cabling." 3.8 FIRESTOPPING A. Apply firestopping to electrical penetrations of fire-rated floor and wall assemblies to restore original fire-resistance rating of assembly according to Section 07 84 13 "Penetration Firestopping." 3.9 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Perform tests and inspections. 1. After installing conductors and cables and before electrical circuitry has been energized, test service entrance and feeder conductors for compliance with requirements. 2. After installing conductors and cables and before electrical circuitry has been energized, test service entrance and feeder conductors for compliance with requirements. 3. Perform each of the following visual and electrical tests: a. Inspect exposed sections of conductor and cable for physical damage and correct connection according to the single-line diagram. b. Test bolted connections for high resistance using one of the following: 1) A low-resistance ohmmeter. 2) Calibrated torque wrench. 3) Thermographic survey. c. Inspect compression-applied connectors for correct cable match and indentation. d. Inspect for correct identification. e. Inspect cable jacket and condition. f. Insulation-resistance test on each conductor for ground and adjacent conductors. Apply a potential of 500-V dc for 300-V rated cable and 1000.V dc for 600-V rated cable for a one-minute duration. g. Continuity test on each conductor and cable. h. Uniform resistance of parallel conductors. 4. Initial Infrared Scanning: After Substantial Completion, but before Final Acceptance, perform an infrared scan of each splice in conductors No. 3 AWG and larger. Remove box and equipment covers so splices are accessible to portable scanner. Correct deficiencies determined during the scan. a. Instrument: Use an infrared scanning device designed to measure temperature or to detect significant deviations from normal values. Provide calibration record for device. b. Record of Infrared Scanning: Prepare a certified report that identifies switches checked and that describes scanning results. Include notation of deficiencies detected, remedial action taken, and observations after remedial action. B. Cables will be considered defective if they do not pass tests and inspections. C. Prepare test and inspection reports to record the following: 1. Procedures used. 2. Results that comply with requirements. 3. Results that do not comply with requirements, and corrective action taken to achieve compliance with requirements. END OF SECTION SECTION 26 05 26 GROUNDING AND BONDING FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Section includes grounding and bonding systems and equipment. 1.3 INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS A. Field quality-control reports. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 SYSTEM DESCRIPTION A. Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. B. Comply with UL 467 for grounding and bonding materials and equipment. 2.2 MANUFACTURERS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Burndy; Part of Hubbell Electrical Systems. 2. ERICO International Corporation. 3. ILSCO. 4. O-Z/Gedney; a brand of Emerson Industrial Automation. 5. Thomas & Betts Corporation; A Member of the ABB Group. 2.3 CONDUCTORS A.  Insulated Conductors:  Copper wire  or  cable insulated for 600 V unless otherwise  required by applicable Code or authorities having jurisdiction.  B.  Bare Copper Conductors:  1. Stranded Conductors: ASTM B8. 2. Bonding Conductor: No. 4 or No. 6 AWG, stranded conductor, or as otherwise specified. 3. Bonding Jumper: Copper tape, braided conductors terminated with copper ferrules; 1-5/8 inches (41 mm) wide and 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) thick or as otherwise specified. C. Grounding Bus: Unless otherwise specified on Drawings, shall be predrilled rectangular bars of annealed copper, 1/4 by 4 inches (6.3 by 100 mm) in cross section, with 9/32.inch (7.14-mm) dual-holes spaced 1-1/8 inches (28 mm) apart. Stand-off insulators for mounting shall comply with UL 891 for use in switchboards, 600 V and shall be Lexan or PVC, impulse tested at 5000 V. 2.4 CONNECTORS A. Listed and labeled by an NRTL acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction for applications in which used and for specific types, sizes, and combinations of conductors and other items connected. B. Welded Connectors: Exothermic-welding kits of types recommended by kit manufacturer for materials being joined and installation conditions. C. Bus-Bar Connectors: Mechanical type, cast silicon bronze, solderless compression-type wire terminals, and long-barrel, two-bolt connection to ground bus bar. D. Beam Clamps: Mechanical type, terminal, ground wire access from four directions, with dual, tin-plated or silicon bronze bolts. E. Cable-to-Cable Connectors: Compression type, copper or copper alloy. F. Cable Tray Ground Clamp: Mechanical type, zinc-plated malleable iron. G. Conduit Hubs: Mechanical type, terminal with threaded hub. H. Ground Rod Clamps: Mechanical type, copper or copper alloy, terminal with hex head bolt. I. Lay-in Lug Connector: Mechanical type, copper rated for direct burial terminal with set screw. J. Signal Reference Grid Clamp: Mechanical type, stamped-steel terminal with hex head screw. K. Straps: Solid copper, cast-bronze clamp. Rated for 600 A. L. U-Bolt Clamps: Mechanical type, copper or copper alloy, terminal listed for direct burial. M. Water Pipe Clamps: 1. Mechanical type, two pieces with stainless-steel bolts. a. Material: Die-cast zinc alloy. b. Listed for direct burial. 2. U-bolt type with malleable-iron clamp and copper ground connector rated for direct burial. 2.5 GROUNDING ELECTRODES A. Ground Rods: Copper-clad steel; 3/4 inch by 10 feet (19 mm by 3 m). PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 APPLICATIONS A. Conductors: Install solid conductor for No. 6 AWG and smaller, and stranded conductors for No. 4 AWG and larger unless otherwise indicated. B. Grounding Conductors: Green-colored insulation. C. Isolated Grounding Conductors: Green-colored insulation with continuous yellow stripe. On feeders with isolated ground, identify grounding conductor where visible to normal inspection, with alternating bands of green and yellow tape, with at least three bands of green and two bands of yellow. D. Grounding Bus: Install in all electrical equipment rooms, in rooms housing service equipment, in all data or telecommunications rooms, and elsewhere as indicated on Drawings. 1. Install bus horizontally, on insulated spacers 2 inches (50 mm) minimum from wall, 6 inches (150 mm) above finished floor unless otherwise indicated. 2. Where indicated on both sides of doorways, route bus up to top of door frame, across top of doorway, and down; connect to horizontal bus. E. Conductor Terminations and Connections: 1. Pipe and Equipment Grounding Conductor Terminations: Bolted connectors. 2. Underground Connections: Welded connectors except at test wells and as otherwise indicated. 3. Connections to Ground Rods at Test Wells: Bolted connectors. 4. Connections to Structural Steel: Welded connectors. 3.2 GROUNDING AT THE SERVICE A. Equipment grounding conductors and grounding electrode conductors shall be connected to the ground bus. Install a main bonding jumper between the neutral and ground buses. 3.3 GROUNDING SEPARATELY DERIVED SYSTEMS A. Generator: When any generator is considered a separately derived system, utilizing a 4-Pole Transfer Switch, install grounding electrode(s) at the generator location. The electrode shall be connected to the equipment grounding conductor and to the frame of the generator, as well as bonded to generator neutral conductor. B. Transformers: Install grounding electrode(s) at any transformer locations on the project. The electrode shall be connected to the transformer frame, X0 terminal, and equipment grounding conductor. 3.4 EQUIPMENT GROUNDING A. Install insulated equipment grounding conductors with all feeders and branch circuits. B. Air-Duct Equipment Circuits: Install insulated equipment grounding conductor to duct-mounted electrical devices operating at 120 V and more, including air cleaners, heaters, dampers, humidifiers, and other duct electrical equipment. Bond conductor to each unit and to air duct and connected metallic piping. C. Water Heater, Heat-Tracing, and Antifrost Heating Cables: Install a separate insulated equipment grounding conductor to each electric water heater and heat-tracing cable. Bond conductor to heater units, piping, connected equipment, and components. D. Isolated Grounding Receptacle Circuits: Install an insulated equipment grounding conductor connected to the receptacle grounding terminal. Isolate conductor from raceway and from panelboard grounding terminals. Terminate at equipment grounding conductor terminal of the applicable derived system or service unless otherwise indicated. E. Isolated Equipment Enclosure Circuits: For designated equipment supplied by a branch circuit or feeder, isolate equipment enclosure from supply circuit raceway with a nonmetallic raceway fitting listed for the purpose. Install fitting where raceway enters enclosure, and install a separate insulated equipment grounding conductor. Isolate conductor from raceway and from panelboard grounding terminals. Terminate at equipment grounding conductor terminal of the applicable derived system or service unless otherwise indicated. F. If Project scope includes poles supporting outdoor lighting fixtures, install a grounding electrode adjacent to the pole and a separate insulated equipment grounding conductor in addition to grounding conductor installed with branch-circuit conductors. 3.5 INSTALLATION A. Grounding Conductors: Route along shortest and straightest paths possible unless otherwise indicated or required by Code. Avoid obstructing access or placing conductors where they may be subjected to strain, impact, or damage. B. Ground Bonding Common with Lightning Protection System: Comply with NFPA 780 and UL 96 when interconnecting with lightning protection system. Bond electrical power system ground directly to lightning protection system grounding conductor at closest point to electrical service grounding electrode. Use bonding conductor sized same as system grounding electrode conductor and install in conduit. C. Ground Rods: Drive rods until tops are 2 inches (50 mm) below finished floor or final grade unless otherwise indicated. 1. Interconnect ground rods with grounding electrode conductor below grade and as otherwise indicated. Make connections without exposing steel or damaging coating if any. 2. Use exothermic welds for all below-grade connections. 3. For grounding electrode system, install at least three rods spaced at least one-rod length from each other and located at least the same distance from other grounding electrodes, and connect to the service grounding electrode conductor. 4. Install at least one test well for each service unless otherwise indicated. Install at the ground rod electrically closest to service entrance. Set top of test well flush with finished grade or floor. D. Bonding Straps and Jumpers: Install in locations accessible for inspection and maintenance except where routed through short lengths of conduit. 1. Bonding to Structure: Bond straps directly to basic structure, taking care not to penetrate any adjacent parts. 2. Bonding to Equipment Mounted on Vibration Isolation Hangers and Supports: Install bonding so vibration is not transmitted to rigidly mounted equipment. 3. Use exothermic-welded connectors for outdoor locations; if a disconnect-type connection is required, use a bolted clamp. E. Grounding and Bonding for Piping: 1. Metal Water Service Pipe: Install insulated copper grounding conductors, in conduit, from building's main service equipment, or grounding bus, to main metal water service entrances to building. Connect grounding conductors to main metal water service pipes; use a bolted clamp connector or bolt a lug-type connector to a pipe flange by using one of the lug bolts of the flange. Where a dielectric main water fitting is installed, connect grounding conductor on street side of fitting. Bond metal grounding conductor conduit or sleeve to conductor at each end. 2. Water Meter Piping: Use braided-type bonding jumpers to electrically bypass water meters. Connect to pipe with a bolted connector. 3. Bond each aboveground portion of gas piping system downstream from equipment shutoff valve. F. Concrete-Encased Grounding Electrode (Ufer Ground): Fabricate according to NFPA 70; use a minimum of 20 feet (6 m) of bare copper conductor not smaller than No. 4 AWG. 1. If concrete foundation is less than 20 feet (6 m) long, coil excess conductor within base of foundation. 2. Bond grounding conductor to reinforcing steel in at least four locations and to anchor bolts. Extend grounding conductor below grade and connect to building's grounding grid or to grounding electrode external to concrete. G. Connections: Make connections so possibility of galvanic action or electrolysis is minimized. Select connectors, connection hardware, conductors, and connection methods so metals in direct contact are galvanically compatible. 1. Use electroplated or hot-tin-coated materials to ensure high conductivity and to make contact points closer in order of galvanic series. 2. Make connections with clean, bare metal at points of contact. 3. Make aluminum-to-steel connections with stainless-steel separators and mechanical clamps. 4. Make aluminum-to-galvanized-steel connections with tin-plated copper jumpers and mechanical clamps. 5. Coat and seal connections having dissimilar metals with inert material to prevent future penetration of moisture to contact surfaces. 3.6 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Perform tests and inspections. B. Tests and Inspections: 1. After installing grounding system but before permanent electrical circuits have been energized, test for compliance with requirements. 2. Inspect physical and mechanical condition. Verify tightness of accessible, bolted, electrical connections with a calibrated torque wrench according to manufacturer's written instructions. 3. Test completed grounding system at each location where a maximum ground-resistance level is specified, at service disconnect enclosure grounding terminal, and at individual ground rods. Make tests at ground rods before any conductors are connected. a. Measure ground resistance no fewer than two full days after last trace of precipitation and without soil being moistened by any means other than natural drainage or seepage and without chemical treatment or other artificial means of reducing natural ground resistance. b. Perform tests by fall-of-potential method according to IEEE 81. C. Grounding system will be considered defective if it does not pass tests and inspections. D. Prepare test and inspection reports. E. Report measured ground resistances that exceed the following values: 1. Power and Lighting Equipment or System with Capacity of 500 kVA and Less: 10 ohms. 2. Power and Lighting Equipment or System with Capacity of 500 to 1000 kVA: 5 ohms. 3. Power and Lighting Equipment or System with Capacity More Than 1000 kVA: 3 ohms. 4. Power Distribution Units or Panelboards Serving Electronic Equipment: 1 ohm(s). 5. Substations and Pad-Mounted Equipment: 5 ohms. F. Excessive Ground Resistance: If resistance to ground exceeds specified values, notify Engineer promptly and include recommendations to reduce ground resistance. END OF SECTION SECTION 26 05 29 HANGERS AND SUPPORTS FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Section Includes: 1. Steel slotted support systems. 2. Conduit and cable support devices. 3. Support for conductors in vertical conduit. 4. Structural steel for fabricated supports and restraints. 5. Mounting, anchoring, and attachment components, including powder-actuated fasteners, mechanical expansion anchors, concrete inserts, clamps, through bolts, toggle bolts, and hanger rods. 6. Fabricated metal equipment support assemblies. B. Related Requirements: 1. Section 26 05 48.16 "Seismic Controls for Electrical Systems" for products and installation requirements necessary for compliance with seismic criteria. 1.3 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For each type of product. 1. Include construction details, material descriptions, dimensions of individual components and profiles, and finishes for the following: a. Slotted support systems, hardware, and accessories. b. Clamps. c. Hangers. 2. Include rated capacities and furnished specialties and accessories. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 SUPPORT, ANCHORAGE, AND ATTACHMENT COMPONENTS A. Steel Slotted Support Systems: Preformed steel channels and angles with minimum 13/32-inch-(10-mm-) diameter holes at a maximum of 8 inches (200 mm) o.c. in at least one surface. 1. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: a. B-line, an Eaton business. b. ERICO International Corporation. c. Thomas & Betts Corporation; A Member of the ABB Group. d. Unistrut; Part of Atkore International. 2. Standard: Comply with MFMA-4 factory-fabricated components for field assembly. 3. Material for Channel, Fittings, and Accessories: Plain steel. 4. Channel Width: Selected for applicable load criteria. 5. Metallic Coatings: Hot-dip galvanized after fabrication, applied according to MFMA-4. B. Conduit and Cable Support Devices: Steel hangers, clamps, and associated fittings, designed for types and sizes of raceway or cable to be supported. C. Support for Conductors in Vertical Conduit: Factory-fabricated assembly consisting of threaded body and insulating wedging plug or plugs for nonarmored electrical conductors or cables in riser conduits. Plugs shall have number, size, and shape of conductor gripping pieces as required to suit individual conductors or cables supported. Body shall be made of malleable iron. D. Structural Steel for Fabricated Supports and Restraints: ASTM A 36/A 36M steel plates, shapes, and bars; black and galvanized. E. Mounting, Anchoring, and Attachment Components: Items for fastening electrical items or their supports to building surfaces include the following: 1. Powder-Actuated Fasteners: Threaded-steel stud, for use in hardened Portland cement concrete, steel, or wood, with tension, shear, and pullout capacities appropriate for supported loads and building materials where used. a. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1) Hilti, Inc. 2) ITW Ramset/Red Head; Illinois Tool Works, Inc. 3) MKT Fastening, LLC. 2. Mechanical-Expansion Anchors: Insert-wedge-type, zinc-coated steel, for use in hardened Portland cement concrete, with tension, shear, and pullout capacities appropriate for supported loads and building materials where used. a. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1) B-line, an Eaton business. 2) Hilti, Inc. 3) ITW Ramset/Red Head; Illinois Tool Works, Inc. 4) MKT Fastening, LLC. 3. Concrete Inserts: Steel or malleable-iron, slotted support system units are similar to MSS Type 18 units and comply with MFMA-4 or MSS SP-58. 4. Clamps for Attachment to Steel Structural Elements: MSS SP-58 units are suitable for attached structural element. 5. Through Bolts: Structural type, hex head, and high strength. Comply with ASTM F 3125/F 3125M,Grade A325 (Grade A325M). 6. Toggle Bolts: All-steel springhead type. 7. Hanger Rods: Threaded steel. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 APPLICATION A. Comply with the following standards for application and installation requirements of hangers and supports, except where requirements on Drawings or in this Section are stricter: 1. NECA 1. 2. NECA 101 B. Comply with requirements in Section 07 84 13 "Penetration Firestopping" for firestopping materials and installation for penetrations through fire-rated walls, ceilings, and assemblies. C. Comply with requirements for raceways and boxes specified in Section 26 05 33 "Raceways and Boxes for Electrical Systems." D. Maximum Support Spacing and Minimum Hanger Rod Size for Raceways: Space supports for EMT, IMC, and RMC as required by NFPA 70. Minimum rod size shall be 1/4 inch (6 mm) in diameter. E. Multiple Raceways or Cables: Install trapeze-type supports fabricated with steel slotted or other support system, sized so capacity can be increased by at least 25 percent in future without exceeding specified design load limits. 1. Secure raceways and cables to these supports with two-bolt conduit clamps or single-bolt conduit clamps using spring friction action for retention in support channel. 3.2 SUPPORT INSTALLATION A. Comply with NECA 1 and NECA 101 for installation requirements except as specified in this article. B. Raceway Support Methods: In addition to methods described in NECA 1, EMT may be supported by openings through structure members, according to NFPA 70. C. Strength of Support Assemblies: Where not indicated, select sizes of components so strength will be adequate to carry present and future static loads within specified loading limits. Minimum static design load used for strength determination shall be weight of supported components plus 200 lb (90 kg). D. Mounting and Anchorage of Surface-Mounted Equipment and Components: Anchor and fasten electrical items and their supports to building structural elements by the following methods unless otherwise indicated by code: 1. To Wood: Fasten with lag screws or through bolts. 2. To New Concrete: Bolt to concrete inserts. 3. To Masonry: Approved toggle-type bolts on hollow masonry units and expansion anchor fasteners on solid masonry units. 4. To Existing Concrete: Expansion anchor fasteners. 5. Instead of expansion anchors, powder-actuated driven threaded studs provided with lock washers and nuts may be used in existing standard-weight concrete 4 inches (100 mm) thick or greater. Do not use for anchorage to lightweight-aggregate concrete or for slabs less than 4 inches (100 mm) thick. 6. To Steel: Beam clamps (MSS SP-58, Type 19, 21, 23, 25, or 27), complying with MSS SP-69. 7. To Light Steel: Sheet metal screws. 8. Items Mounted on Hollow Walls and Nonstructural Building Surfaces: Mount cabinets, panelboards, disconnect switches, control enclosures, pull and junction boxes, transformers, and other devices on slotted-channel racks attached to substrate by means that comply with seismic-restraint strength and anchorage requirements. E. Drill holes for expansion anchors in concrete at locations and to depths that avoid the need for reinforcing bars. 3.3 CONCRETE BASES A. Construct concrete bases of dimensions indicated, but not less than 4 inches (100 mm) larger in both directions than supported unit, and so anchors will be a minimum of 10 bolt diameters from edge of the base. B. Use 3000-psi (20.7-MPa), 28-day compressive-strength concrete. Concrete materials, reinforcement, and placement requirements are specified in Section 03 30 00 "Cast-in-Place Concrete." C. Anchor equipment to concrete base as follows: 1. Place and secure anchorage devices. Use supported equipment manufacturer's setting drawings, templates, diagrams, instructions, and directions furnished with items to be embedded. 2. Install anchor bolts to elevations required for proper attachment to supported equipment. 3. Install anchor bolts according to anchor-bolt manufacturer's written instructions. END OF SECTION SECTION 26 05 33 RACEWAYS AND BOXES FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Section Includes: 1. Metal conduits and fittings. 2. Nonmetallic conduits and fittings. 3. Metal wireways and auxiliary gutters. 4. Surface raceways. 5. Boxes, enclosures, and cabinets. B. Related Requirements: 1. Section 07 84 13 "Penetration Firestopping" for firestopping at conduit and box entrances. 2. Section 26 05 43 "Underground Ducts and Raceways for Electrical Systems" for exterior ductbanks, manholes, and underground utility construction. 1.3 DEFINITIONS A. GRC: Galvanized rigid steel conduit. B. IMC: Intermediate metal conduit. 1.4 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For surface raceways, wireways and fittings, floor boxes, hinged-cover enclosures, and cabinets. 1.5 INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS A. Coordination Drawings: Conduit routing plans, drawn to scale, on which the following items are shown and coordinated with each other, using input from installers of items involved: 1. Structural members in paths of conduit groups with common supports. 2. HVAC and plumbing items and architectural features in paths of conduit groups with common supports. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 METAL CONDUITS AND FITTINGS A. Metal Conduit: 1. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: a. Allied Tube & Conduit; a part of Atkore International. b. FSR Inc. c. O-Z/Gedney; a brand of Emerson Industrial Automation. d. Republic Conduit. e. Thomas & Betts Corporation; A Member of the ABB Group. 2. Listing and Labeling: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. 3. GRC: Comply with ANSI C80.1 and UL 6. 4. IMC: Comply with ANSI C80.6 and UL 1242. 5. PVC-Coated Steel Conduit: PVC-coated rigid steel conduit. a. Comply with NEMA RN 1. b. Coating Thickness: 0.040 inch (1 mm), minimum. 6. EMT: Comply with ANSI C80.3 and UL 797. 7. FMC: Comply with UL 1; zinc-coated steel. 8. LFMC: Flexible steel conduit with PVC jacket and complying with UL 360. B. Metal Fittings: 1. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: a. Allied Tube & Conduit; a part of Atkore International. b. FSR Inc. c. O-Z/Gedney; a brand of Emerson Industrial Automation. d. Republic Conduit. e. Thomas & Betts Corporation; A Member of the ABB Group. 2. Comply with NEMA FB 1 and UL 514B. 3. Listing and Labeling: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. 4. Fittings, General: Listed and labeled for type of conduit, location, and use. 5. Conduit Fittings for Hazardous (Classified) Locations: Comply with UL 1203 and NFPA 70. 6. Fittings for EMT: a. Material: Steel. b. Type: Setscrew or Compression. 7. Expansion Fittings: PVC or steel to match conduit type, complying with UL 651, rated for environmental conditions where installed, and including flexible external bonding jumper. 8. Coating for Fittings for PVC-Coated Conduit: Minimum thickness of 0.040 inch (1 mm), with overlapping sleeves protecting threaded joints. C. Joint Compound for IMC, GRC: Approved, as defined in NFPA 70, by authorities having jurisdiction for use in conduit assemblies, and compounded for use to lubricate and protect threaded conduit joints from corrosion and to enhance their conductivity. 2.2 NONMETALLIC CONDUITS AND FITTINGS A. Nonmetallic Conduit: 1. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: a. CANTEX INC. b. CertainTeed Corporation. c. RACO; Hubbell. d. Thomas & Betts Corporation; A Member of the ABB Group. 2. Listing and Labeling: Nonmetallic conduit shall be listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. 3. RNC: Type EPC-40-PVC, complying with NEMA TC 2 and UL 651 unless otherwise indicated. B. Nonmetallic Fittings: 1. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: a. CANTEX INC. b. CertainTeed Corporation. c. RACO; Hubbell. d. Thomas & Betts Corporation; A Member of the ABB Group. 2. Fittings, General: Listed and labeled for type of conduit, location, and use. 3. Fittings for RNC: Comply with NEMA TC 3; match to conduit or tubing type and material. 4. Solvents and Adhesives: As recommended by conduit manufacturer. 2.3 METAL WIREWAYS AND AUXILIARY GUTTERS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. B-line, an Eaton business. 2. Hoffman; a brand of Pentair Equipment Protection. 3. MonoSystems, Inc. 4. Square D. B. Description: Sheet metal, complying with UL 870 and NEMA 250, Type 1 or Type 3R unless otherwise indicated, and sized according to NFPA 70. 1. Metal wireways installed outdoors shall be listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. C. Fittings and Accessories: Include covers, couplings, offsets, elbows, expansion joints, adapters, hold-down straps, end caps, and other fittings to match and mate with wireways as required for complete system. D. Wireway Covers: Screw-cover type (or Flanged-and-gasketed type for Listing) unless otherwise indicated. E. Finish: Manufacturer's standard enamel finish. 2.4 SURFACE RACEWAYS A. Listing and Labeling: Surface raceways shall be listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. B. Surface Metal Raceways: Galvanized steel with snap-on covers complying with UL 5. Manufacturer's standard enamel finish in color selected by Architect. 1. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: a. MonoSystems, Inc. b. Panduit Corp. c. Wiremold / Legrand. 2.5 BOXES, ENCLOSURES, AND CABINETS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Crouse-Hinds, an Eaton business. 2. Erickson Electrical Equipment Company. 3. FSR Inc. 4. Hoffman; a brand of Pentair Equipment Protection. 5. Hubbell Incorporated. 6. MonoSystems, Inc. 7. O-Z/Gedney; a brand of Emerson Industrial Automation. 8. RACO; Hubbell. 9. Thomas & Betts Corporation; A Member of the ABB Group. 10. Wiremold / Legrand. B. General Requirements for Boxes, Enclosures, and Cabinets: Boxes, enclosures, and cabinets installed in wet locations shall be listed for use in wet locations. C. Sheet Metal Outlet and Device Boxes: Comply with NEMA OS 1 and UL 514A. D. Cast-Metal Outlet and Device Boxes: Comply with NEMA FB 1, ferrous alloy, Type FD, with gasketed cover. E. Nonmetallic Outlet and Device Boxes: Comply with NEMA OS 2 and UL 514C. 1. Nonmetallic device boxes shall be single or double gang as required. F. Metal Floor Boxes: 1. Material: Cast metal. 2. Type: Fully adjustable. 3. Shape: Rectangular. 4. Listing and Labeling: Metal floor boxes shall be listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. G. Nonmetallic Floor Boxes: Nonadjustable, round or rectangular. 1. Listing and Labeling: Nonmetallic floor boxes shall be listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. H. Luminaire Outlet Boxes: Nonadjustable, designed for attachment of luminaire weighing 50 lb (23 kg). Outlet boxes designed for attachment of luminaires weighing more than 50 lb (23 kg) shall be listed and marked for the maximum allowable weight. I. Paddle Fan Outlet Boxes: Nonadjustable, designed for attachment of paddle fan weighing 70 lb (32 kg). 1. Listing and Labeling: Paddle fan outlet boxes shall be listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. J. Small Sheet Metal Pull and Junction Boxes: NEMA OS 1. K. Box extensions used to accommodate new building finishes shall be of same material as recessed box. L. Device Box Dimensions: 4 inches square by 2-1/8 inches deep (100 mm square by 60 mm deep) for metallic boxes. M. Gangable boxes are allowed. N. Cabinets: 1. NEMA 250, Type 1 or Type 3R galvanized-steel box with removable interior panel and removable front, finished inside and out with manufacturer's standard enamel. 2. Hinged door in front cover with flush latch and concealed hinge. 3. Key latch to match panelboards. 4. Metal barriers to separate wiring of different systems and voltage. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 RACEWAY APPLICATION A. Outdoors: Apply raceway products as specified below unless otherwise indicated: 1. Exposed Conduit: GRC, IMC. 2. Concealed Conduit, Aboveground: GRC, IMC, or EMT. 3. Underground Conduit: RNC, Type EPC-40-PVC, concrete encased. 4. Underground Utility Service Conduit: GRC, IMC, RNC, Type EPC-80-PVC, concrete encased. 5. Final Connection to Vibrating Equipment (Including Transformers and Hydraulic, Pneumatic, Electric Solenoid, or Motor-Driven Equipment): LFMC. 6. Boxes and Enclosures, Aboveground: NEMA 250, Type 3R. B. Indoors: Apply raceway products as specified below unless otherwise indicated: 1. Exposed, Not Subject to Physical Damage: EMT. 2. Exposed and Subject to Severe Physical Damage: GRC. Raceway locations include, but not limited to, the following: a. Loading dock. b. Corridors used for traffic of mechanized carts, forklifts, and pallet-handling units. c. Mechanical rooms. d. Gymnasiums. e. Machine rooms. 3. Concealed in Ceilings and Interior Walls and Partitions: EMT. 4. Final Connection to Vibrating Equipment (Including Transformers and Hydraulic, Pneumatic, Electric Solenoid, or Motor-Driven Equipment): FMC, except use LFMC in damp or wet locations. 5. Damp or Wet Locations: GRC or IMC. 6. Boxes and Enclosures: NEMA 250, Type 1 or Type 3R as required, except use NEMA 250, Type 4 stainless steel in institutional and commercial kitchens. C. Minimum Raceway Size: 1/2-inch (16-mm) trade size. D. Raceway Fittings: Compatible with raceways and suitable for use and location. 1. Rigid and Intermediate Steel Conduit: Use threaded rigid steel conduit fittings unless otherwise indicated. Comply with NEMA FB 2.10. 2. PVC Externally Coated, Rigid Steel Conduits: Use only fittings listed for use with this type of conduit. Patch and seal all joints, nicks, and scrapes in PVC coating after installing conduits and fittings. Use sealant recommended by fitting manufacturer and apply in thickness and number of coats recommended by manufacturer. 3. EMT: Use setscrew or compression, steel fittings. Comply with NEMA FB 2.10. 4. Flexible Conduit: Use only fittings listed for use with flexible conduit. Comply with NEMA FB 2.20. E. Install surface raceways only where indicated on Drawings. 3.2 INSTALLATION A. Comply with requirements in Section 26 05 29 "Hangers and Supports for Electrical Systems" for hangers and supports. B. Comply with NECA 1 and NECA 101 for installation requirements except where requirements on Drawings or in this article are stricter. Comply with NFPA 70 limitations for types of raceways allowed in specific occupancies and number of floors. C. Do not install raceways or electrical items on any "explosion-relief" walls or rotating equipment. D. Do not fasten conduits onto the bottom side of a metal deck roof. E. Keep raceways at least 6 inches (150 mm) away from parallel runs of flues and steam or hot-water pipes. Install horizontal raceway runs above water and steam piping. F. Complete raceway installation before starting conductor installation. G. Arrange stub-ups so curved portions of bends are not visible above finished slab. H. Make bends in raceway using large-radius preformed ells. Field bending shall be according to NFPA 70 minimum radii requirements. Use only equipment specifically designed for material and size involved. I. Conceal conduit within finished walls, ceilings, and floors unless otherwise indicated. Install conduits parallel or perpendicular to building lines. J. Support conduit within 12 inches (300 mm) of enclosures to which attached. K. Raceways Embedded in Slabs: 1. Run conduit larger than 1-inch (27-mm) trade size, parallel or at right angles to main reinforcement. Where at right angles to reinforcement, place conduit close to slab support. Secure raceways to reinforcement at maximum 10-foot (3-m) intervals. 2. Arrange raceways to cross building expansion joints at right angles with expansion fittings. 3. Arrange raceways to keep a minimum of 2 inches (50 mm) of concrete cover in all directions. 4. Do not embed threadless fittings in concrete unless specifically approved by Architect or Engineer for each specific location. 5. Change from RNC Type EPC-40-PVC to GRC or EMT before rising above floor. L. Stub-Ups to Above Recessed Ceilings: 1. Use EMT, IMC, or GRC for raceways. 2. Use a conduit bushing or insulated fitting to terminate stub-ups not terminated in hubs or in an enclosure. 3. Stub-ups shall terminate in accessible locations. Stub-ups at hard gypsum ceilings shall extend to nearest accessible location. M. Threaded Conduit Joints, Exposed to Wet, Damp, Corrosive, or Outdoor Conditions: Apply listed compound to threads of raceway and fittings before making up joints. Follow compound manufacturer's written instructions. N. Coat field-cut threads on PVC-coated raceway with a corrosion-preventing conductive compound prior to assembly. O. Terminate threaded conduits into threaded hubs or with locknuts on inside and outside of boxes or cabinets. Install bushings on conduits up to 1-1/4-inch (35mm) trade size and insulated throat metal bushings on 1-1/2-inch (41-mm) trade size and larger conduits terminated with locknuts. Install insulated throat metal grounding bushings on service conduits. P. Install raceways square to the enclosure and terminate at enclosures with locknuts. Install locknuts hand tight plus 1/4 turn more. Q. Do not rely on locknuts to penetrate nonconductive coatings on enclosures. Remove coatings in the locknut area prior to assembling conduit to enclosure to assure a continuous ground path. R. Cut conduit perpendicular to the length. For conduits 2-inch (53-mm) trade size and larger, use roll cutter or a guide to make cut straight and perpendicular to the length. S. Install pull wires in empty raceways. Use polypropylene or monofilament plastic line with not less than 200-lb (90-kg) tensile strength. Leave at least 12 inches (300 mm) of slack at each end of pull wire. Cap underground raceways designated as spare above grade alongside raceways in use. T. Surface Raceways: 1. Install surface raceway with a minimum 2-inch (50-mm) radius control at bend points. 2. Secure surface raceway with screws or other anchor-type devices at intervals not exceeding 48 inches (1200 mm) and with no less than two supports per straight raceway section. Support surface raceway according to manufacturer's written instructions. Tape and glue are not acceptable support methods. U. Install raceway sealing fittings at accessible locations according to NFPA 70 and fill them with listed sealing compound. For concealed raceways, install each fitting in a flush steel box with a blank cover plate having a finish similar to that of adjacent plates or surfaces. Install raceway sealing fittings according to NFPA 70. V. Install devices to seal raceway interiors at accessible locations. Locate seals so no fittings or boxes are between the seal and the following changes of environments. Seal the interior of all raceways at the following points: 1. Where conduits pass from warm to cold locations, such as boundaries of refrigerated spaces. 2. Where an underground service raceway enters a building or structure. 3. Conduit extending from interior to exterior of building. 4. Conduit extending into pressurized duct and equipment. 5. Conduit extending into pressurized zones that are automatically controlled to maintain different pressure set points. 6. Where otherwise required by NFPA 70. W. Comply with manufacturer's written instructions for solvent welding RNC and fittings. X. Expansion-Joint Fittings: 1. Install in each run of aboveground RNC that is located where environmental temperature change may exceed 30 deg F (17 deg C) and that has straight-run length that exceeds 25 feet (7.6 m). Install in each run of aboveground GRC and EMT conduit that is located where environmental temperature change may exceed 100 deg F (55 deg C) and that has straight-run length that exceeds 100 feet (30 m). 2. Install type and quantity of fittings that accommodate temperature change listed for each of the following locations: a. Outdoor Locations Not Exposed to Direct Sunlight: 125 deg F (70 deg C) temperature change. b. Outdoor Locations Exposed to Direct Sunlight: 155 deg F (86 deg C) temperature change. c. Indoor Spaces Connected with Outdoors without Physical Separation: 125 deg F (70 deg C) temperature change. d. Attics: 135 deg F (75 deg C) temperature change. 3. Install fitting(s) that provide expansion and contraction for at least 0.00041 inch per foot of length of straight run per deg F (0.06 mm per meter of length of straight run per deg C) of temperature change for PVC conduits. Install fitting(s) that provide expansion and contraction for at least 0.000078 inch per foot of length of straight run per deg F (0.0115 mm per meter of length of straight run per deg C) of temperature change for metal conduits. 4. Install expansion fittings at all locations where conduits cross building or structure expansion joints. 5. Install each expansion-joint fitting with position, mounting, and piston setting selected according to manufacturer's written instructions for conditions at specific location at time of installation. Install conduit supports to allow for expansion movement. Y. Flexible Conduit Connections: Comply with NEMA RV 3. Use a maximum of 72 inches (1830 mm) of flexible conduit for recessed and semi-recessed luminaires, equipment subject to vibration, noise transmission, or movement; and for transformers and motors. 1. Use LFMC in damp or wet locations subject to severe physical damage. 2. Use LFMC or LFNC in damp or wet locations not subject to severe physical damage. Z. Mount boxes at heights indicated on Drawings. If mounting heights of boxes are not individually indicated, give priority to ADA requirements. Install boxes with height measured to center of box unless otherwise indicated. AA. Recessed Boxes in Masonry Walls: Saw-cut opening for box in center of cell of masonry block, and install box flush with surface of wall. Prepare block surfaces to provide a flat surface for a raintight connection between box and cover plate or supported equipment and box. BB. Horizontally separate boxes mounted on opposite sides of walls so they are not in the same vertical channel. CC. Locate boxes so that cover or plate will not span different building finishes. DD. Support boxes of three gangs or more from more than one side by spanning two framing members or mounting on brackets specifically designed for the purpose. EE. Fasten junction and pull boxes to or support from building structure. Do not support boxes by conduits. FF. Set metal floor boxes level and flush with finished floor surface. GG. Set nonmetallic floor boxes level. Trim after installation to fit flush with finished floor surface. 3.3 INSTALLATION OF UNDERGROUND CONDUIT A. Direct-Buried Conduit: 1. Excavate trench bottom to provide firm and uniform support for conduit. Prepare trench bottom as specified in Section 31 20 00 "Earth Moving" for pipe less than 6 inches (150 mm) in nominal diameter. 2. Install backfill as specified in Section 31 20 00 "Earth Moving." 3. After installing conduit, backfill and compact. Start at tie-in point, and work toward end of conduit run, leaving conduit at end of run free to move with expansion and contraction as temperature changes during this process. Firmly hand tamp backfill around conduit to provide maximum supporting strength. After placing controlled backfill to within 12 inches (300 mm) of finished grade, make final conduit connection at end of run and complete backfilling with normal compaction as specified in Section 31 20 00 "Earth Moving." 4. Install manufactured rigid steel conduit elbows for stub-ups at poles and equipment and at building entrances through floor. a. Couple steel conduits to ducts with adapters designed for this purpose, and encase coupling with 3 inches (75 mm) of concrete for a minimum of 12 inches (300 mm) on each side of the coupling. b. For stub-ups at equipment mounted on outdoor concrete bases and where conduits penetrate building foundations, extend steel conduit horizontally a minimum of 60 inches (1500 mm) from edge of foundation or equipment base. Install insulated grounding bushings on terminations at equipment. 5. Underground Warning Tape: Comply with requirements in Section 26 05 53 "Identification for Electrical Systems." 3.4 SLEEVE AND SLEEVE-SEAL INSTALLATION FOR ELECTRICAL PENETRATIONS A. Install sleeves and sleeve seals at penetrations of exterior floor and wall assemblies. Comply with requirements in Section 26 05 44 "Sleeves and Sleeve Seals for Electrical Raceways and Cabling." 3.5 FIRESTOPPING A. Install firestopping at penetrations of fire-rated floor and wall assemblies. Comply with requirements in Section 07 84 13 "Penetration Firestopping." 3.6 PROTECTION A. Protect coatings, finishes, and cabinets from damage and deterioration. 1. Repair damage to galvanized finishes with zinc-rich paint recommended by manufacturer. 2. Repair damage to PVC coatings or paint finishes with matching touchup coating recommended by manufacturer. END OF SECTION SECTION 26 05 36 CABLE TRAYS FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Section Includes: 1. Ladder cable trays. 2. Single-rail cable trays. 3. Trough cable trays. 4. Fiberglass cable trays. 1.3 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For each type of product. 1. Include data indicating dimensions and finishes for each type of cable tray indicated. B. Shop Drawings: For each type of cable tray. 1. Show fabrication and installation details of cable trays, including plans, elevations, and sections of components and attachments to other construction elements. Designate components and accessories, including clamps, brackets, hanger rods, splice-plate connectors, expansion-joint assemblies, straight lengths, and fittings. C. Delegated-Design Submittal: For seismic restraints. 1. Seismic-Restraint Details: Signed and sealed by a qualified professional engineer, licensed in the state where Project is located, who is responsible for their preparation. 2. Design Calculations: Calculate requirements for selecting seismic restraints. 3. Detail fabrication, including anchorages and attachments to structure and to supported cable trays. 1.4 INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS A. Seismic Qualification Certificates: For cable trays, accessories, and components, from manufacturer. 1. Basis for Certification: Indicate whether withstand certification is based on actual test of assembled components or on calculation. 2. Dimensioned Outline Drawings of Equipment Unit: Identify center of gravity and locate and describe mounting and anchorage provisions. 3. Detailed description of equipment anchorage devices on which the certification is based and their installation requirements. B. Field quality-control reports. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. Delegated Design: Engage a qualified professional engineer, as defined in Section 01 40 00 "Quality Requirements," to design cable tray supports and seismic bracing. B. Seismic Performance: Cable trays and supports shall withstand the effects of earthquake motions determined according to ASCE/SEI 7. 1. The term "withstand" means "cable trays will remain in place without separation of any parts when subjected to the seismic forces specified." 2. Component Importance Factor: 1.5. C. Thermal Movements: Allow for thermal movements from ambient and surface temperature changes in cable tray installed outdoors. 1. Temperature Change: 120 deg F (67 deg C), ambient; 180 deg F (100 deg C), material surfaces. 2.2 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CABLE TRAYS A. Cable Trays and Accessories: Identified as defined in NFPA 70 and marked for intended location, application, and grounding. 1. Source Limitations: Obtain cable trays and components from single manufacturer. B. Sizes and Configurations: See the Cable Tray Schedule on Drawings for specific requirements for types, materials, sizes, and configurations. C. Structural Performance: See articles on individual cable tray types for specific values for the following parameters: 1. Uniform Load Distribution: Capable of supporting a uniformly distributed load on the indicated support span when supported as a simple span and tested according to NEMA VE 1. 2. Concentrated Load: A load applied at midpoint of span and centerline of tray. 3. Load and Safety Factors: Applicable to both side rails and rung capacities. 2.3 LADDER CABLE TRAYS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Allied Tube & Conduit; a Tyco International Ltd. Co. 2. Chalfant Manufacturing Company. 3. Cooper B-Line, Inc. 4. Mono-Systems, Inc. 5. MP Husky. 6. Niedax-Kleinhuis USA, Inc. B. Description: 1. Configuration: Two I-beam side rails with transverse rungs welded to side rails. 2. Rung Spacing: 9 inches (225 mm) o.c. 3. Radius-Fitting Rung Spacing: 9 inches (225 mm) at center of tray's width. 4. Minimum Cable-Bearing Surface for Rungs: 7/8-inch (22-mm) width with radius edges. 5. No portion of the rungs shall protrude below the bottom plane of side rails. 6. Structural Performance of Each Rung: Capable of supporting a maximum cable load, with a safety factor of 1.5, plus a200-lb (90-kg) concentrated load, when tested according to NEMA VE 1. 7. Minimum Usable Load Depth: 4 inches (100 mm). 8. Straight Section Lengths: 10 feet (3 m) except where shorter lengths are required to facilitate tray assembly. 9. Width: 24 inches (600 mm) unless otherwise indicated on Drawings. 10. Fitting Minimum Radius: 24 inches (600 mm). 11. Class Designation: Comply with NEMA VE 1, Class 12B. 12. Splicing Assemblies: Bolted type using serrated flange locknuts. 13. Hardware and Fasteners: ASTM F 593 and ASTM F 594 stainless steel, Type 316. 14. Splice Plate Capacity: Splices located within support span shall not diminish rated loading capacity of cable tray. 2.4 SINGLE-RAIL CABLE TRAYS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Allied Tube & Conduit. 2. Cooper B-Line, Inc. 3. Mono-Systems, Inc. 4. MP Husky. B. Description: 1. Configuration: Center rail with extruded-aluminum rungs arranged symmetrically about the center rail. 2. Construction: Aluminum rungs mechanically connected to aluminum center rail in at least two places, with ends finished to protect installers and cables. 3. Rung Spacing: 9 inches (225 mm) o.c. 4. Radius-Fitting Rung Spacing: 9 inches (225 mm) at center of tray's width. 5. Straight Section Lengths: 10 feet (3 m) except where shorter lengths are required to facilitate tray assembly. 6. Width: 24 inches (600 mm) unless otherwise indicated on Drawings. 7. Support Point: Splice fittings shall be hanger support point. 8. Support Spacing: Support each section at midpoint. Support wall-mounted sections a maximum of one-sixth of the section length from each end. 9. Loading Depth: 4 inches (100 mm). 10. Maximum Loads: 50 lb/ft. (74 kg/m). 11. Unbalanced Loads: Maintain cable tray rungs within six degrees of horizontal under all loading conditions. 12. Splicing Assemblies: Bolted type using serrated flange locknuts. 13. Splicing Assembly Capacity: Splices located within support span shall not diminish rated loading capacity of cable tray. 14. Hardware and Fasteners: ASTM F 593 and ASTM F 594 stainless steel, Type 316. 15. Splices and Connectors: Protect cables from edges of center rail and do not intrude into cable fill area. 2.5 MATERIALS AND FINISHES A. Aluminum: 1. Materials: Alloy 6063-T6 according to ANSI H35.1/H 35.1M for extruded components, and Alloy 5052-H32 or Alloy 6061-T6 according to ANSI H35.1/H 35.1M for fabricated parts. 2. Hardware: Chromium-zinc-plated steel, ASTM F 1136. 3. Hardware for Aluminum Cable Tray Used Outdoors: Stainless steel, Type 316, ASTM F 593 and ASTM F 594. B. Stainless Steel: 1. Materials: Low-carbon, passivated, stainless steel, Type 304L, ASTM F 593 and ASTM F 594. 2. Hardware for Stainless-Steel Cable Tray Used Outdoors: Stainless steel, Type 316, ASTM F 593 and ASTM F 594. 2.6 CABLE TRAY ACCESSORIES A. Fittings: Tees, crosses, risers, elbows, and other fittings as indicated, of same materials and finishes as cable tray. B. Covers: Solid type made of same materials and with same finishes as cable tray. C. Barrier Strips: Same materials and finishes as for cable tray. D. Cable tray supports and connectors, including bonding jumpers, as recommended by cable tray manufacturer. 2.7 WARNING SIGNS A. Lettering: 1-1/2-inch-(40-mm-) high, black letters on yellow background with legend "Warning! Not To Be Used as Walkway, Ladder, or Support for Ladders or Personnel." B. Comply with requirements for fasteners in Section 26 05 53 "Identification for Electrical Systems." 2.8 SOURCE QUALITY CONTROL A. Testing: Test and inspect cable trays according to NEMA VE 1. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 CABLE TRAY INSTALLATION A. Install cable trays according to NEMA VE 2. B. Install cable trays as a complete system, including fasteners, hold-down clips, support systems, barrier strips, adjustable horizontal and vertical splice plates, elbows, reducers, tees, crosses, cable dropouts, adapters, covers, and bonding. C. Install cable trays so that the tray is accessible for cable installation and all splices are accessible for inspection and adjustment. D. Remove burrs and sharp edges from cable trays. E. Join aluminum cable tray with splice plates; use four square-neck carriage bolts and locknuts. F. Fasten cable tray supports to building structure and install seismic restraints. G. Design fasteners and supports to carry cable tray, the cables, and a concentrated load of 200 lb (90 kg). Comply with requirements in Section 26 05 29 "Hangers and Supports for Electrical Systems." Comply with seismic-restraint details according to Section 26 05 48.16 "Seismic Controls for Electrical Systems." H. Place supports so that spans do not exceed maximum spans on schedules and provide clearances shown on Drawings. Install intermediate supports when cable weight exceeds the load-carrying capacity of the tray rungs. I. Construct supports from channel members, threaded rods, and other appurtenances furnished by cable tray manufacturer. Arrange supports in trapeze or wall-bracket form as required by application. J. Support bus assembly to prevent twisting from eccentric loading. K. Install center-hung supports for single-rail trays designed for 60 versus 40 percent eccentric loading condition, with a safety factor of 3. L. Locate and install supports according to NEMA VE 2. Do not install more than one cable tray splice between supports. M. Make connections to equipment with flanged fittings fastened to cable trays and to equipment. Support cable trays independent of fittings. Do not carry weight of cable trays on equipment enclosure. N. Install expansion connectors where cable trays cross building expansion joints and in cable tray runs that exceed dimensions recommended in NEMA VE 2. Space connectors and set gaps according to applicable standard. O. Make changes in direction and elevation using manufacturer's recommended fittings. P. Make cable tray connections using manufacturer's recommended fittings. Q. Seal penetrations through fire and smoke barriers. Comply with requirements in Section 07 84 13 "Penetration Firestopping." R. Install capped metal sleeves for future cables through firestop-sealed cable tray penetrations of fire and smoke barriers. S. Install cable trays with enough workspace to permit access for installing cables. T. Install barriers to separate cables of different systems, such as power, communications, and data processing; or of different insulation levels, such as 600, 5000, and 15 000 V. U. Install permanent covers, if used, after installing cable. Install cover clamps according to NEMA VE 2. V. Clamp covers on cable trays installed outdoors with heavy-duty clamps. W. Install warning signs in visible locations on or near cable trays after cable tray installation. 3.2 CABLE TRAY GROUNDING A. Ground cable trays according to NFPA 70 unless additional grounding is specified. Comply with requirements in Section 26 05 26 "Grounding and Bonding for Electrical Systems." B. Cable trays with electrical power conductors shall be bonded together with splice plates listed for grounding purposes or with listed bonding jumpers. C. Cable trays with single-conductor power conductors shall be bonded together with a grounding conductor run in the tray along with the power conductors and bonded to the tray at 72-inch (1800-mm) intervals. The grounding conductor shall be sized according to NFPA 70, Article 250.122, "Size of Equipment Grounding Conductors," and Article 392, "Cable Trays." D. When using epoxy-or powder-coat painted cable trays as a grounding conductor, completely remove coating at all splice contact points or ground connector attachment. After completing splice-to-grounding-bolt attachment, repair the coated surfaces with coating materials recommended by cable tray manufacturer. E. Bond cable trays to power source for cables contained within with bonding conductors sized according to NFPA 70, Article 250.122, "Size of Equipment Grounding Conductors." 3.3 CABLE INSTALLATION A. Install cables only when each cable tray run has been completed and inspected. B. Fasten cables on horizontal runs with cable clamps or cable ties according to NEMA VE 2. Tighten clamps only enough to secure the cable, without indenting the cable jacket. Install cable ties with a tool that includes an automatic pressure-limiting device. C. Fasten cables on vertical runs to cable trays every 18 inches (450 mm). D. Fasten and support cables that pass from one cable tray to another or drop from cable trays to equipment enclosures. Fasten cables to the cable tray at the point of exit and support cables independent of the enclosure. The cable length between cable trays or between cable tray and enclosure shall be no more than 72 inches (1800 mm). E. Tie MI cables down every 36 inches (900 mm) where required to provide a 2-hour fire rating and every 72 inches (1800 mm) elsewhere. F. In existing construction, remove inactive or dead cables from cable trays. 3.4 CONNECTIONS A. Remove paint from all connection points before making connections. Repair paint after the connections are completed. B. Connect raceways to cable trays according to requirements in NEMA VE 2 and NEMA FG 1. 3.5 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Perform the following tests and inspections with the assistance of a factory-authorized service representative: 1. After installing cable trays and after electrical circuitry has been energized, survey for compliance with requirements. 2. Visually inspect cable insulation for damage. Correct sharp corners, protuberances in cable trays, vibrations, and thermal expansion and contraction conditions, which may cause or have caused damage. 3. Verify that the number, size, and voltage of cables in cable trays do not exceed that permitted by NFPA 70. Verify that communications or data-processing circuits are separated from power circuits by barriers or are installed in separate cable trays. 4. Verify that there are no intruding items such as pipes, hangers, or other equipment in the cable tray. 5. Remove dust deposits, industrial process materials, trash of any description, and any blockage of tray ventilation. 6. Visually inspect each cable tray joint and each ground connection for mechanical continuity. Check bolted connections between sections for corrosion. Clean and retorque in suspect areas. 7. Check for improperly sized or installed bonding jumpers. 8. Check for missing, incorrect, or damaged bolts, bolt heads, or nuts. When found, replace with specified hardware. 9. Perform visual and mechanical checks for adequacy of cable tray grounding; verify that all takeoff raceways are bonded to cable trays. Test entire cable tray system for continuity. Maximum allowable resistance is 1 ohm. B. Prepare test and inspection reports. 3.6 PROTECTION A. Protect installed cable trays and cables. 1. Install temporary protection for cables in open trays to safeguard exposed cables against falling objects or debris during construction. Temporary protection for cables and cable tray can be constructed of wood or metal materials and shall remain in place until the risk of damage is over. 2. Repair damage to galvanized finishes with zinc-rich paint recommended by cable tray manufacturer. 3. Repair damage to paint finishes with matching touchup coating recommended by cable tray manufacturer. END OF SECTION SECTION 26 05 53 IDENTIFICATION FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Section Includes: 1. Color and legend requirements for raceways, conductors, and warning labels and signs. 2. Labels. 3. Bands and tubes. 4. Tapes and stencils. 5. Tags. 6. Signs. 7. Cable ties. 8. Paint for identification. 9. Fasteners for labels and signs. 1.3 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For each type of product. 1. Include construction details, material descriptions, dimensions of individual components and profiles, and finishes for electrical identification products. B. Samples: For each type of label and sign to illustrate composition, size, colors, lettering style, mounting provisions, and graphic features of identification products. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. Comply with ASME A13.1. E. Comply with NFPA 70E and Section 26 05 73.19 "Arc-Flash Hazard Analysis" requirements for arc-flash warning labels. F. Adhesive-attached labeling materials, including label stocks, laminating adhesives, and inks used by label printers, shall comply with UL 969. G. Thermal Movements: Allow for thermal movements from ambient and surface temperature changes. 1. Temperature Change: 120 deg F (67 deg C), ambient; 180 deg F (100 deg C), material surfaces. 2.2 COLOR AND LEGEND REQUIREMENTS B.  Comply with NFPA 70.  C.  Comply with 29 CFR 1910.144 and 29 CFR 1910.145.  D.  Comply with ANSI Z535.4 for safety signs and labels.  A. Raceways and Cables Carrying Circuits at 600 V or Less: 1. Black letters on an orange field. 2. Legend: Indicate voltage and system or service type. B. Color-Coding for Phase-and Voltage-Level Identification, 600 V or Less: Use colors listed below for ungrounded service, feeder, and branch-circuit conductors. 1. Color shall be factory applied or field applied for sizes larger than No. 8 AWG, if authorities having jurisdiction permit. 2. Colors for 208/120-V Circuits: a. Phase A: Black. b. Phase B: Red. c. Phase C: Blue. d. Neutral: White 3. Colors for 240-V Circuits: a. Phase A: Black. b. Phase B: Red. 4. Colors for 480/277-V Circuits: a. Phase A: Brown. b. Phase B: Orange. c. Phase C: Yellow. d. Neutral: Gray. 5. Color for Equipment Grounds: Green. 6. Colors for Isolated Grounds: Green with yellow stripe. C. Raceways and Cables Carrying Circuits at More Than 600 V: 1. Black letters on an orange field. 2. Legend: "DANGER -CONCEALED HIGH VOLTAGE WIRING." D. Warning Label Colors: 1. Identify system voltage with black letters on an orange background. E. Warning labels and signs shall include, but are not limited to, the following legends: 1. Multiple Power Source Warning: "DANGER -ELECTRICAL SHOCK HAZARD .EQUIPMENT HAS MULTIPLE POWER SOURCES." 2. Workspace Clearance Warning: "WARNING -OSHA REGULATION -AREA IN FRONT OF ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT MUST BE KEPT CLEAR FOR 36 INCHES (915 MM)." 3. Provide Arc Flash Warning labels on all Switchboards, Panelboards, and similar equipment in accordance with Specification Section 26 05 73.19 "Arc-Flash Hazard Analysis". F. Equipment Identification Labels: 1. Black letters on a white field, engraved plastic laminate. 2. Unless otherwise indicated or directed by Owner, provide a single line of text with 1/2-inch high lettering on a 1-1/2 inch high nameplate. 3. Apply labels for each unit of the following categories of equipment and similar devices using mechanical fasteners: a. Panelboards, electrical cabinets, and enclosures. b. Access doors and panels for concealed electrical items. c. Electrical switchgear and switchboards. d. Emergency system boxes and enclosures. e. Disconnect switches. f. Enclosed circuit breakers. g. Generating Equipment and UPS h. Power transfer equipment. i. Contactors. j. Remote-controlled switches. k. Dimmer Cabinets and controllers. l. Control devices. m. Transformers. 2.3 LABELS A. Self-Adhesive Labels: Vinyl, thermal, transfer-printed, 3-mil-(0.08-mm-) thick, multicolor, weather-and UV-resistant, pressure-sensitive adhesive labels, configured for intended use and location. 1. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: a. Brady Corporation. b. Brother International Corporation. c. Ideal Industries, Inc. d. Panduit Corp. 2. Minimum Nominal Size: a. 1-1/2 by 6 inches (37 by 150 mm) for raceway and conductors. b. 3-1/2 by 5 inches (76 by 127 mm) for equipment. c. As required by authorities having jurisdiction. 2.4 TAPES AND STENCILS A. Self-Adhesive Vinyl Tape: Colored, heavy duty, waterproof, fade resistant; not less than 3 mils (0.08 mm) thick by 1 to 2 inches (25 to 50 mm) wide; compounded for outdoor use. 1. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: a. Brady Corporation. b. Carlton Industries, LP. c. emedco. d. 3M Scotch. B. Underground-Line Warning Tape: 1. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: a. Brady Corporation. b. Ideal Industries, Inc. c. LEM Products Inc. d. Seton Identification Products. 2. Tape: a. Recommended by manufacturer for the method of installation and suitable to identify and locate underground electrical and communications utility lines. b. Printing on tape shall be permanent and shall not be damaged by burial operations. c. Tape material and ink shall be chemically inert and not subject to degradation when exposed to acids, alkalis, and other destructive substances commonly found in soils. 3. Color and Printing: a. Comply with ANSI Z535.1, ANSI Z535.2, ANSI Z535.3, ANSI Z535.4, and ANSI Z535.5. b. Inscriptions for Red-Colored Tapes: "ELECTRIC LINE, HIGH VOLTAGE". c. Inscriptions for Orange-Colored Tapes: "TELEPHONE CABLE, CATV CABLE, COMMUNICATIONS CABLE, OPTICAL FIBER CABLE". 4. Tape: a. Pigmented polyolefin, bright colored, continuous-printed on one side with the type and name of the utility, compounded for direct-burial service. b. Width: 3 inches (75 mm). c. Thickness: 4 mils (0.1 mm). d. Weight: 18.5 lb/1000 sq. ft. (9.0 kg/100 sq. m). e. Tensile according to ASTM D882: 30 lbf (133.4 N) and 2500 psi (17.2 MPa). C. Stenciled Legend: In nonfading, waterproof, black ink or paint. Minimum letter height shall be 1 inch (25 mm). 2.5 SIGNS A. Laminated Acrylic or Melamine Plastic Signs: 1. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: a. Brady Corporation. b. Carlton Industries, LP. c. emedco. 2. Engraved legend. 3. Thickness: a. For signs up to 20 sq. in. (129 sq. cm), minimum 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) thick. b. For signs larger than 20 sq. in. (129 sq. cm), 1/8 inch (3.2 mm) thick. c. Engraved legend with black letters on white face. 2.6 CABLE TIES A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Ideal Industries, Inc. 2. Marking Services, Inc. 3. Panduit Corp. B. General-Purpose Cable Ties: Fungus inert, self-extinguishing, one piece, self-locking, and Type 6/6 nylon. 1. Minimum Width: 3/16 inch (5 mm). 2. Tensile Strength at 73 Deg F (23 Deg C) according to ASTM D638: 12,000 psi (82.7 MPa). 3. Temperature Range: Minus 40 to plus 185 deg F (Minus 40 to plus 85 deg C). 4. Color: Black, except where used for color-coding. C. UV-Stabilized Cable Ties: Fungus inert, designed for continuous exposure to exterior sunlight, self-extinguishing, one piece, self-locking, and Type 6/6 nylon. 1. Minimum Width: 3/16 inch (5 mm). 2. Tensile Strength at 73 Deg F (23 Deg C) according to ASTM D638: 12,000 psi (82.7 MPa). 3. Temperature Range: Minus 40 to plus 185 deg F (Minus 40 to plus 85 deg C). 4. Color: Black. D. Plenum-Rated Cable Ties: Self-extinguishing, UV stabilized, one piece, and self-locking. 1. Minimum Width: 3/16 inch (5 mm). 2. Tensile Strength at 73 Deg F (23 Deg C) according to ASTM D638: 7000 psi (48.2 MPa). 3. UL 94 Flame Rating: 94V-0. 4. Temperature Range: Minus 50 to plus 284 deg F (Minus 46 to plus 140 deg C). 5. Color: Black. 2.7 MISCELLANEOUS IDENTIFICATION PRODUCTS A. Paint: Comply with requirements in painting Sections for paint materials and application requirements. Retain paint system applicable for surface material and location (exterior or interior). B. Fasteners for Labels and Signs: Self-tapping, stainless-steel screws or stainless-steel machine screws with nuts and flat and lock washers. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 PREPARATION A. Self-Adhesive Identification Products: Before applying electrical identification products, clean substrates of substances that could impair bond, using materials and methods recommended by manufacturer of identification product. 3.2 INSTALLATION A. Verify and coordinate identification names, abbreviations, colors, and other features with requirements in other Sections requiring identification applications, Drawings, Shop Drawings, manufacturer's wiring diagrams, and operation and maintenance manual. Use consistent designations throughout Project. B. Install identifying devices before installing acoustical ceilings and similar concealment. C. Verify identity of each item before installing identification products. D. Coordinate identification with Project Drawings, manufacturer's wiring diagrams, and operation and maintenance manual. E. Apply identification devices to surfaces that require finish after completing finish work. F. Install signs with approved legend to facilitate proper identification, operation, and maintenance of electrical systems and connected items. G. System Identification for Raceways and Cables under 600 V: Identification shall completely encircle cable or conduit. Place identification of two-color markings in contact, side by side. 1. Secure tight to surface of conductor, cable, or raceway. H. Auxiliary Electrical Systems Conductor Identification: Identify field-installed alarm, control, and signal connections. I. Emergency Operating Instruction Signs: Install instruction signs with white legend on a red background with minimum 3/8-inch-(10-mm-) high letters for emergency instructions at equipment used for power transfer, load shedding, and similar gear requiring Owner operation. J. Elevated Components: Increase sizes of labels, signs, and letters to those appropriate for viewing from the floor. K. Accessible Fittings for Raceways: Identify the covers of each junction and pull box of the following systems with the wiring system legend and system voltage. System legends shall be as follows: 1. "EMERGENCY POWER." 2. "POWER." 3. "UPS." L. Self-Adhesive Wraparound Labels: Secure tight to surface at a location with high visibility and accessibility. M. Self-Adhesive Labels: 1. On each item, install unique designation label that is consistent with wiring diagrams, schedules, and operation and maintenance manual. 2. Unless otherwise indicated, provide a single line of text with 1/2-inch-(13-mm-) high letters on 1-1/2-inch-(38-mm-) high label; where two lines of text are required, use labels 2 inches (50 mm) high. N. Snap-around Color-Coding Bands: Secure tight to surface at a location with high visibility and accessibility. O. Marker Tapes: Secure tight to surface at a location with high visibility and accessibility. P. Self-Adhesive Vinyl Tape: Secure tight to surface at a location with high visibility and accessibility. 1. Field-Applied, Color-Coding Conductor Tape: Apply in half-lapped turns for a minimum distance of 6 inches (150 mm) where splices or taps are made. Apply last two turns of tape with no tension to prevent possible unwinding. Q. Tape and Stencil: Comply with requirements in painting Sections for surface preparation and paint application. R. Underground Line Warning Tape: 1. During backfilling of trenches, install continuous underground-line warning tape directly above cable or raceway at 6 to 8 inches (150 to 200 mm) below finished grade. Use multiple tapes where width of multiple lines installed in a common trench or concrete envelope exceeds 16 inches (400 mm) overall. 2. Install underground-line warning tape for direct-buried cables and cables in raceways. S. Nonmetallic Preprinted Tags: 1. Place in a location with high visibility and accessibility. 2. Secure using general-purpose cable ties or other appropriate means. T. Laminated Acrylic or Melamine Plastic Signs: 1. Attach signs that are not self-adhesive type with mechanical fasteners appropriate to the location and substrate. 2. Unless otherwise indicated, provide a single line of text with 1/2-inch-(13-mm-) high letters on 1-1/2-inch-(38-mm-) high sign; where two lines of text are required, use labels 2 inches (50 mm) high. U. Cable Ties: General purpose, for attaching tags, except as listed below: 1. Outdoors: UV-stabilized nylon. 2. In Spaces Handling Environmental Air: Plenum rated. 3.3 IDENTIFICATION SCHEDULE A. Install identification materials and devices at locations for most convenient viewing without interference with operation and maintenance of equipment. Install access doors or panels to provide view of identifying devices. B. Identify conductors, cables, and terminals in enclosures and at junctions, terminals, pull points, and locations of high visibility. Identify by system and circuit designation. C. Accessible Raceways and Metal-Clad Cables, 600 V or Less, for Service, Feeder, and Branch Circuits, More Than 30 A and 120 V to Ground: Identify with self-adhesive raceway labels. 1. Locate identification at changes in direction, at penetrations of walls and floors, at 50-foot (15-m) maximum intervals in straight runs, and at 25-foot (7.6-m) maximum intervals in congested areas. D. Accessible Fittings for Raceways and Cables within Buildings: Identify the covers of each junction and pull box of the following systems with self-adhesive labels containing the wiring system legend and system voltage. System legends shall be as follows: 1. "EMERGENCY POWER." 2. "POWER." 3. "UPS." E. Power-Circuit Conductor Identification, 600 V or Less: For conductors in vaults, pull and junction boxes, manholes, and handholes, use self-adhesive vinyl tape to identify the phase. 1. Locate identification at changes in direction, at penetrations of walls and floors, at 50-foot (15-m) maximum intervals in straight runs, and at 25-foot (7.6-m) maximum intervals in congested areas. F. Control-Circuit Conductor Identification: For conductors and cables in pull and junction boxes, manholes, and handholes, use self-adhesive labels with the conductor or cable designation, origin, and destination. G. Control-Circuit Conductor Termination Identification: For identification at terminations, provide self-adhesive labels with the conductor designation. H. Conductors to Be Extended in the Future: Attach marker tape to conductors and list source. I. Locations of Underground Lines: Underground-line warning tape for utility service(s), power, lighting, communication, and control wiring and optical-fiber cable. J. Instructional Signs: Self-adhesive labels, including the color code for grounded and ungrounded conductors. K. Warning Labels for Indoor Cabinets, Boxes, and Enclosures for Power and Lighting: Self-adhesive labels. 1. Apply to exterior of door, cover, or other access. 2. For equipment with multiple power or control sources, apply to door or cover of equipment, including, but not limited to, the following: a. Power-transfer switches. b. Controls with external control power connections. L. Arc Flash Warning Labeling: Self-adhesive labels. M. Operating Instruction Signs: Laminated acrylic or melamine plastic signs. N. Emergency Operating Instruction Signs: Laminated acrylic or melamine plastic signs with white legend on a red background with minimum 3/8-inch-(10-mm-) high letters for emergency instructions at equipment used for power transfer, load shedding, etc. O. Equipment Identification Labels: 1. Indoor Equipment: Laminated acrylic or melamine plastic sign. 2. Outdoor Equipment: Stenciled legend 4 inches (100 mm) high. 3. Equipment to Be Labeled: a.  Panelboards: Typewritten directory of circuits in the location provided by  panelboard manufacturer. Panelboard identification shall be in the form of a  self-adhesive, engraved, laminated acrylic or melamine label.  b.  Enclosures and electrical cabinets.  c.  Access doors and panels for concealed electrical items.  d.  Switchgear.  e.  Switchboards.  f.  Transformers: Label that includes tag designation indicated on Drawings  for the transformer, feeder, and panelboards or equipment supplied by the  secondary.  g.  Substations.  h.  Emergency system boxes and enclosures.  i.  Enclosed switches.  j.  Enclosed circuit breakers.  k.  Enclosed controllers.  l.  Variable-speed controllers.  m.  Push-button stations.  n.  Power-transfer equipment.  o.  Contactors.  p.  Battery-inverter units.  q.  Battery racks.  r.  Power-generating units.  s.  Monitoring and control equipment.  t.  UPS equipment.  END OF SECTION  SECTION 26 05 73.13 SHORT-CIRCUIT STUDIES PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Section includes a computer-based, fault-current study to determine the minimum interrupting capacity of circuit protective devices. 1.3 DEFINITIONS A. Existing to Remain: Existing items of construction that are not to be removed and that are not otherwise indicated to be removed and salvaged, or removed and reinstalled. Existing to remain items shall remain functional throughout the construction period. B. One-Line Diagram: A diagram that shows, by means of single lines and graphic symbols, the course of an electric circuit or system of circuits and the component devices or parts used therein. C. Power System Analysis Software Developer: An entity that commercially develops, maintains, and distributes computer software used for power system studies. D. Power Systems Analysis Specialist: Professional engineer in charge of performing the study and documenting recommendations, licensed in the state where Project is located. E. Protective Device: A device that senses when an abnormal current flow exists and then removes the affected portion of the circuit from the system. F. SCCR: Short-circuit current rating. G. Service: The conductors and equipment for delivering electric energy from the serving utility to the wiring system of the premises served. H. Single-Line Diagram: See "One-Line Diagram." 1.4 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: 1. For computer software program to be used for studies. 2. Submit the following after the approval of system protective devices submittals. Submittals shall be in digital form. a. Short-circuit study input data, including completed computer program input data sheets. b. Short-circuit study and equipment evaluation report; signed, dated, and sealed by a qualified professional engineer. 1) Submit study report for action prior to receiving final approval of distribution equipment submittals. If formal completion of studies will cause delay in equipment manufacturing, obtain approval from Engineer for preliminary submittal of sufficient study data to ensure that selection of devices and associated characteristics is satisfactory. 2) Revised one-line diagram, reflecting field investigation results and results of short-circuit study. 1.5 INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS A. Qualification Data: 1. For Power Systems Analysis Software Developer. 2. For Power System Analysis Specialist. 3. For Field Adjusting Agency. B. Product Certificates: For short-circuit study software, certifying compliance with IEEE 399. 1.6 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Operation and Maintenance Data: 1. For overcurrent protective devices to include in emergency, operation, and maintenance manuals. 2. The following are from the Short-Circuit Study Report: a. Final one-line diagram. b. Final Short-Circuit Study Report. c. Short-circuit study data files. d. Power system data. 1.7 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Study shall be performed using commercially developed and distributed software designed specifically for power system analysis. B. Software algorithms shall comply with requirements of standards and guides specified in this Section. C. Manual calculations are unacceptable. 1. Power System Analysis Software Qualifications: Computer program shall be designed to perform short-circuit studies or have a function, component, or add-on module designed to perform short-circuit studies. 2. Computer program shall be developed under the charge of a licensed professional engineer who holds IEEE Computer Society's Certified Software Development Professional certification. D. Power Systems Analysis Specialist Qualifications: Professional engineer licensed in the state where Project is located. All elements of the study shall be performed under the direct supervision and control of this professional engineer. E. Short-Circuit Study Certification: Short-Circuit Study Report shall be signed and sealed by Power Systems Analysis Specialist. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 POWER SYSTEM ANALYSIS SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, utilize products by one of the following: 1. Operation Technology, Inc. 2. Power Analytics, Corporation. 3. SKM Systems Analysis, Inc. B. Comply with IEEE 399 and IEEE 551. 1. Analytical features of power systems analysis software program shall have capability to calculate "mandatory," "very desirable," and "desirable" features as listed in IEEE 399. C. Computer software program shall be capable of plotting and diagramming time-current.characteristic curves as part of its output. 2.2 SHORT-CIRCUIT STUDY REPORT CONTENTS A. Executive summary of study findings. B. Study descriptions, purpose, basis, and scope. Include case descriptions, definition of terms, and guide for interpretation of results. C. One-line diagram of modeled power system, showing the following: 1. Protective device designations and ampere ratings. 2. Conductor types, sizes, and lengths. 3. Transformer kilovolt ampere (kVA) and voltage ratings. 4. Motor and generator designations and kVA ratings. 5. Switchgear, switchboard, motor-control center, and panelboard designations and ratings. 6. Derating factors and environmental conditions. 7. Any revisions to electrical equipment required by the study. D. Comments and recommendations for system improvements or revisions in a written document, separate from one-line diagram. E. Protective Device Evaluation: 1. Evaluate equipment and protective devices and compare to available short-circuit currents. Verify that equipment withstand ratings exceed available short-circuit current at equipment installation locations. 2. Tabulations of circuit breaker, fuse, and other protective device ratings versus calculated short-circuit duties. 3. For 600-V overcurrent protective devices, ensure that interrupting ratings are equal to or higher than calculated 1/2-cycle symmetrical fault current. 4. For devices and equipment rated for asymmetrical fault current, apply multiplication factors listed in standards to 1/2-cycle symmetrical fault current. 5. Verify adequacy of phase conductors at maximum three-phase bolted fault currents; verify adequacy of equipment grounding conductors and grounding electrode conductors at maximum ground-fault currents. Ensure that short-circuit withstand ratings are equal to or higher than calculated 1/2-cycle symmetrical fault current. F. Short-Circuit Study Input Data: 1. One-line diagram of system being studied. 2. Power sources available. 3. Manufacturer, model, and interrupting rating of protective devices. 4. Conductors. 5. Transformer data. G. Short-Circuit Study Output Reports: 1. Low-Voltage Fault Report: Three-phase and unbalanced fault calculations, showing the following for each overcurrent device location: a. Voltage. b. Calculated fault-current magnitude and angle. c. Fault-point X/R ratio. d. Equivalent impedance. 2. Momentary Duty Report: Three-phase and unbalanced fault calculations, showing the following for each overcurrent device location: a. Voltage. b. Calculated symmetrical fault-current magnitude and angle. c. Fault-point X/R ratio. d. Calculated asymmetrical fault currents: 1) Based on fault-point X/R ratio. 2) Based on calculated symmetrical value multiplied by 1.6. 3) Based on calculated symmetrical value multiplied by 2.7. 3. Interrupting Duty Report: Three-phase and unbalanced fault calculations, showing the following for each overcurrent device location: a. Voltage. b. Calculated symmetrical fault-current magnitude and angle. c. Fault-point X/R ratio. d. No AC Decrement (NACD) ratio. e. Equivalent impedance. f. Multiplying factors for 2-, 3-, 5-, and 8-cycle circuit breakers rated on a symmetrical basis. g. Multiplying factors for 2-, 3-, 5-, and 8-cycle circuit breakers rated on a total basis. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 POWER SYSTEM DATA A. Obtain all data necessary for conduct of the study. 1. Verify completeness of data supplied on one-line diagram. Call any discrepancies to Engineer's attention. 2. For equipment included as Work of this Project, use characteristics submitted under provisions of action submittals and information submittals for this Project. 3. For any relocated existing equipment and that which is existing to remain, obtain required electrical distribution system data by field investigation and surveys, conducted by qualified technicians and engineers. Qualifications of technicians and engineers shall be as defined by NFPA 70E. B. Gather and tabulate the required input data to support the short-circuit study. Comply with requirements in Section 01 78 39 "Project Record Documents" for recording circuit protective device characteristics. Record data on a Record Document copy of one-line diagram. Comply with recommendations in IEEE 551 as to the amount of detail that is required to be acquired in the field. Field data gathering shall be under direct supervision and control of the engineer in charge of performing the study and shall be by the engineer or its representative. Data include, but are not limited to, the following: 1. Product Data for Project's overcurrent protective devices involved in overcurrent protective device coordination studies. Use equipment designation tags that are consistent with electrical distribution system diagrams, overcurrent protective device submittals, input and output data, and recommended device settings. 2. Obtain electrical power utility impedance at the service. 3. Power sources and ties. 4. For transformers, include kVA, primary and secondary voltages, connection type, impedance, X/R ratio, taps measured in percent, and phase shift. 5. For reactors, provide manufacturer and model designation, voltage rating, and impedance. 6. For circuit breakers and fuses, provide manufacturer and model designation. List type of breaker, type of trip, SCCR, current rating, and breaker settings. 7. Generator short-circuit current contribution data, including short-circuit reactance, rated kVA, rated voltage, and X/R ratio. 8. Busway manufacturer and model designation, current rating, impedance, lengths, and conductor material. 9. Motor horsepower and NEMA MG 1 code letter designation. 10. Conductor sizes, lengths, number, conductor material and conduit material (magnetic or nonmagnetic). 11. Derating factors. 3.2 SHORT-CIRCUIT STUDY A. Perform study following the general study procedures contained in IEEE 399. B. Calculate short-circuit currents according to IEEE 551. C. Base study on device characteristics supplied by device manufacturer. D. Extent of electrical power system is indicated on Drawings. E. Begin short-circuit current analysis at the service, extending down to system overcurrent protective devices as follows: 1. To normal system low-voltage load buses where fault current is 10 kA or less. 2. Exclude equipment rated 240 V ac or less when supplied by a single transformer rated less than 30 kVA. F. Study electrical distribution system from normal and alternate power sources throughout electrical distribution system for Project. Study all cases of system-switching configurations and alternate operations that could result in maximum fault conditions. G. Include the ac fault-current decay from induction motors, synchronous motors, and asynchronous generators and apply to low-and medium-voltage, three-phase ac systems. Also account for the fault-current dc decrement to address asymmetrical requirements of interrupting equipment. H. Calculate short-circuit momentary and interrupting duties for a three-phase bolted fault and a single line-to-ground fault at each equipment indicated on one-line diagram. 1. For grounded systems, provide a bolted line-to-ground fault-current study for areas as defined for the three-phase bolted fault short-circuit study. I. Include in the report identification of any protective device applied outside its capacity. 1. Identify corrective steps required to remediate noncompliant devices found. 2. Include corrective measures in scope. END OF SECTION SECTION 26 05 73.16 COORDINATION STUDIES PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Section includes computer-based, overcurrent protective device coordination studies to determine overcurrent protective devices and to determine overcurrent protective device settings for selective tripping. 1. Study results shall be used to determine coordination of series-rated devices. 1.3 DEFINITIONS A. Existing to Remain: Existing items of construction that are not to be removed and that are not otherwise indicated to be removed, removed and salvaged, or removed and reinstalled. Existing to remain items shall remain functional throughout the construction period. B. One-Line Diagram: A diagram that shows, by means of single lines and graphic symbols, the course of an electric circuit or system of circuits and the component devices or parts used therein. C. Power System Analysis Software Developer: An entity that commercially develops, maintains, and distributes computer software used for power system studies. D. Power System Analysis Specialist: Professional engineer in charge of performing the study and documenting recommendations, licensed in the state where Project is located. E. Protective Device: A device that senses when an abnormal current flow exists and then removes the affected portion of the circuit from the system. F. SCCR: Short-circuit current rating. G. Service: The conductors and equipment for delivering electric energy from the serving utility to the wiring system of the premises served. H. Single-Line Diagram: See "One-Line Diagram." 1.4 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: 1. For computer software program to be used for studies. 2. Submit the following after the approval of system protective devices submittals. Submittals shall be in digital form. a. Coordination-study input data, including completed computer program input data sheets. b. Study and equipment evaluation reports. 3. Overcurrent protective device coordination study report; signed, dated, and sealed by a qualified professional engineer. a. Submit study report for action prior to receiving final approval of distribution equipment submittals. If formal completion of studies will cause delay in equipment manufacturing, obtain approval from Engineer for preliminary submittal of sufficient study data to ensure that selection of devices and associated characteristics is satisfactory. 1.5 INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS A. Qualification Data: 1. For Power System Analysis Software Developer. 2. For Power Systems Analysis Specialist. B. Product Certificates: For overcurrent protective device coordination study software, certifying compliance with IEEE 399. 1.6 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Operation and Maintenance Data: For overcurrent protective devices to include in emergency, operation, and maintenance manuals. 1. The following are from the Coordination Study Report: a. Final one-line diagram. b. Final protective device coordination study. c. Coordination study data files. d. List of all protective device settings. e. Time-current coordination curves. f. Power system data. 1.7 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Studies shall be performed using commercially developed and distributed software designed specifically for power system analysis. B. Software algorithms shall comply with requirements of standards and guides specified in this Section. C. Manual calculations are unacceptable. D. Power System Analysis Software Qualifications: 1. Computer program shall be designed to perform coordination studies or have a function, component, or add-on module designed to perform coordination studies. 2. Computer program shall be developed under the charge of a licensed professional engineer who holds IEEE Computer Society's Certified Software Development Professional certification. E. Power Systems Analysis Specialist Qualifications: Professional engineer licensed in the state where Project is located. All elements of the study shall be performed under the direct supervision and control of this professional engineer. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 POWER SYSTEM ANALYSIS SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, utilize products by one of the following: 1. Operation Technology, Inc. 2. Power Analytics, Corporation. 3. SKM Systems Analysis, Inc. B. Comply with IEEE 242 and IEEE 399. C. Analytical features of device coordination study computer software program shall have the capability to calculate "mandatory," "very desirable," and "desirable" features as listed in IEEE 399. D. Computer software program shall be capable of plotting and diagramming time-current.characteristic curves as part of its output. Computer software program shall report device settings and ratings of all overcurrent protective devices and shall demonstrate selective coordination by computer-generated, time-current coordination plots. 1. Optional Features: a. Arcing faults. b. Simultaneous faults. c. Explicit negative sequence. d. Mutual coupling in zero sequence. 2.2 COORDINATION STUDY REPORT CONTENTS A. Executive summary of study findings. B. Study descriptions, purpose, basis, and scope. Include case descriptions, definition of terms, and guide for interpretation of results. C. One-line diagram of modeled power system, showing the following: 1. Protective device designations and ampere ratings. 2. Conductor types, sizes, and lengths. 3. Transformer kilovolt ampere (kVA) and voltage ratings. 4. Motor and generator designations and kVA ratings. 5. Switchgear, switchboard, motor-control center, and panelboard designations. 6. Any revisions to electrical equipment required by the study. 7. Study Input Data: As described in "Power System Data" Article. a. Short-Circuit Study Output: As specified in "Short-Circuit Study Output Reports" Paragraph in "Short-Circuit Study Report Contents" Article in Section 26 05 73.13 "Short-Circuit Studies." D. Protective Device Coordination Study: 1. Report recommended settings of protective devices, ready to be applied in the field. Use manufacturer's data sheets for recording the recommended setting of overcurrent protective devices when available. a. Phase and Ground Relays: 1) Device tag. 2) Relay current transformer ratio and tap, time dial, and instantaneous pickup value. 3) Recommendations on improved relaying systems, if applicable. b. Circuit Breakers: 1) Adjustable pickups and time delays (long time, short time, and ground). 2) Adjustable time-current characteristic. 3) Adjustable instantaneous pickup. 4) Recommendations on improved trip systems, if applicable. c. Fuses: Show current rating, voltage, and class. E. Time-Current Coordination Curves: Determine settings of overcurrent protective devices to achieve selective coordination. Graphically illustrate that adequate time separation exists between devices installed in series, including power utility company's upstream devices. Prepare separate sets of curves for the switching schemes and for emergency periods where the power source is local generation. Show the following information: 1. Device tag and title, one-line diagram with legend identifying the portion of the system covered. 2. Terminate device characteristic curves at a point reflecting maximum symmetrical or asymmetrical fault current to which the device is exposed. 3. Identify the device associated with each curve by manufacturer type, function, and, if applicable, tap, time delay, and instantaneous settings recommended. 4. Plot the following listed characteristic curves, as applicable: a. Power utility's overcurrent protective device. b. Medium-voltage equipment overcurrent relays. c. Medium-and low-voltage fuses including manufacturer's minimum melt, total clearing, tolerance, and damage bands. d. Low-voltage equipment circuit-breaker trip devices, including manufacturer's tolerance bands. e. Transformer full-load current, magnetizing inrush current, and ANSI through-fault protection curves. f. Cables and conductors damage curves. g. Ground-fault protective devices. h. Motor-starting characteristics and motor damage points. i. Generator short-circuit decrement curve and generator damage point. j. The largest feeder circuit breaker in each motor-control center and panelboard. 5. Maintain selectivity for tripping currents caused by overloads. 6. Maintain maximum achievable selectivity for tripping currents caused by overloads on series-rated devices. 7. Provide adequate time margins between device characteristics such that selective operation is achieved. 8. Comments and recommendations for system improvements. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 EXAMINATION A. Examine Project overcurrent protective device submittals for compliance with electrical distribution system coordination requirements and other conditions affecting performance of the Work. Devices to be coordinated are indicated on Drawings. 1. Proceed with coordination study only after relevant equipment submittals have been assembled. Overcurrent protective devices that have not been submitted and approved prior to coordination study may not be used in study. 3.2 POWER SYSTEM DATA A. Obtain all data necessary for conduct of the overcurrent protective device study. 1. Verify completeness of data supplied in one-line diagram on Drawings. Call any discrepancies to Engineer's attention. 2. For equipment included as Work of this Project, use characteristics submitted under provisions of action submittals and information submittals for this Project. 3. For any relocated existing equipment and that which is existing to remain, obtain required electrical distribution system data by field investigation and surveys, conducted by qualified technicians and engineers. Qualifications of technicians and engineers shall be as defined by NFPA 70E. B. Gather and tabulate all required input data to support the coordination study. List below is a guide. Comply with recommendations in IEEE 551 for the amount of detail required to be acquired in the field. Field data gathering shall be under direct supervision and control of the engineer in charge of performing the study, and shall be by the engineer or its representative who holds NETA ETT-Certified Technician Level III or NICET Electrical Power Testing Level III certification. Data include, but are not limited to, the following: 1. Product Data for overcurrent protective devices specified in other Sections and involved in overcurrent protective device coordination studies. Use equipment designation tags that are consistent with electrical distribution system diagrams, overcurrent protective device submittals, input and output data, and recommended device settings. 2. Electrical power utility impedance at the service. 3. Power sources and ties. 4. Short-circuit current at each system bus (three phase and line to ground). 5. Full-load current of all loads. 6. Voltage level at each bus. 7. For transformers, include kVA, primary and secondary voltages, connection type, impedance, X/R ratio, taps measured in percent, and phase shift. 8. For reactors, provide manufacturer and model designation, voltage rating, and impedance. 9. For circuit breakers and fuses, provide manufacturer and model designation. List type of breaker, type of trip and available range of settings, SCCR, current rating, and breaker settings. 10. Generator short-circuit current contribution data, including short-circuit reactance, rated kVA, rated voltage, and X/R ratio. 11. For relays, provide manufacturer and model designation, current transformer ratios, potential transformer ratios, and relay settings. 12. Maximum demands from service meters. 13. Busway manufacturer and model designation, current rating, impedance, lengths, size, and conductor material. 14. Motor horsepower and NEMA MG 1 code letter designation. 15. Low-voltage cable sizes, lengths, number, conductor material, and conduit material (magnetic or nonmagnetic). 16. Medium-voltage cable sizes, lengths, conductor material, cable construction, metallic shield performance parameters, and conduit material (magnetic or nonmagnetic). 17. Data sheets to supplement electrical distribution system one-line diagram, cross-referenced with tag numbers on diagram, showing the following: a. Special load considerations, including starting inrush currents and frequent starting and stopping. b. Transformer characteristics, including primary protective device, magnetic inrush current, and overload capability. c. Motor full-load current, locked rotor current, service factor, starting time, type of start, and thermal-damage curve. d. Generator thermal-damage curve. e. Ratings, types, and settings of utility company's overcurrent protective devices. f. Special overcurrent protective device settings or types stipulated by utility company. g. Time-current-characteristic curves of devices indicated to be coordinated. h. Manufacturer, frame size, interrupting rating in amperes root mean square (rms) symmetrical, ampere or current sensor rating, long-time adjustment range, short-time adjustment range, and instantaneous adjustment range for circuit breakers. i. Manufacturer and type, ampere-tap adjustment range, time-delay adjustment range, instantaneous attachment adjustment range, and current transformer ratio for overcurrent relays. j. Switchgear, switchboards, motor-control centers, and panelboards ampacity, and SCCR in amperes rms symmetrical. k. Identify series-rated interrupting devices for a condition where the available fault current is greater than the interrupting rating of downstream equipment. Obtain device data details to allow verification that series application of these devices complies with NFPA 70 and UL 489 requirements. 3.3 COORDINATION STUDY A. Comply with IEEE 242 for calculating short-circuit currents and determining coordination time intervals. B. Comply with IEEE 399 for general study procedures. C. Base study on device characteristics supplied by device manufacturer. D. Extent of electrical power system to be studied is indicated on Drawings. E. Begin analysis at the service, extending down to system overcurrent protective devices as follows: 1. To normal system low-voltage load buses where fault current is 10 kA or less. 2. Exclude equipment rated 240 V ac or less when supplied by a single transformer rated less than 30 kVA. F. Study electrical distribution system from normal and alternate power sources throughout electrical distribution system for Project. Study all cases of system-switching configurations and alternate operations that could result in maximum fault conditions. G. Transformer Primary Overcurrent Protective Devices: 1. Device shall not operate in response to the following: a. Inrush current when first energized. b. Self-cooled, full-load current or forced-air-cooled, full-load current, whichever is specified for that transformer. c. Permissible transformer overloads according to IEEE C57.96 if required by unusual loading or emergency conditions. 2. Device settings shall protect transformers according to IEEE C57.12.00, for fault currents. H. Motor Protection: 1. Select protection for low-voltage motors according to IEEE 242 and NFPA 70. 2. Select protection for motors served at voltages more than 600 V according to IEEE 620. I. Conductor Protection: Protect cables against damage from fault currents according to ICEA P-32-382, ICEA P-45-482, and protection recommendations in IEEE 242. Demonstrate that equipment withstands the maximum short-circuit current for a time equivalent to the tripping time of the primary relay protection or total clearing time of the fuse. To determine temperatures that damage insulation, use curves from cable manufacturers or from listed standards indicating conductor size and short-circuit current. J. Generator Protection: Select protection according to manufacturer's written instructions and to IEEE 242. K. Include the ac fault-current decay from induction motors, synchronous motors, and asynchronous generators and apply to low-and medium-voltage, three-phase ac systems. Also account for fault-current dc decrement, to address asymmetrical requirements of interrupting equipment. L. Calculate short-circuit momentary and interrupting duties for a three-phase bolted fault and a single line-to-ground fault at each equipment indicated on one-line diagram. 1. For grounded systems, provide a bolted line-to-ground fault-current study for areas as defined for the three-phase bolted fault short-circuit study. M. Protective Device Evaluation: 1. Evaluate equipment and protective devices and compare to short-circuit ratings. 2. Adequacy of switchgear, motor-control centers, and panelboard bus bars to withstand short-circuit stresses. 3. Any application of series-rated devices shall be recertified, complying with requirements in NFPA 70. 4. Include in the report identification of any protective device applied outside its capacity. 3.4 FIELD ADJUSTING A. Adjust relay and protective device settings according to recommended settings provided by the coordination study. Field adjustments shall be completed by the engineering service division of equipment manufacturer under the "Startup and Acceptance Testing" contract portion. B. Make modifications to equipment as required to accomplish compliance with short-circuit and protective device coordination studies. C. Testing and adjusting shall be by Contractor with assistance of a full-time employee of the Field Adjusting Agency, who holds NETA ETT-Certified Technician Level III or NICET Electrical Power Testing Level III certification. 1. Perform each visual and mechanical inspection and electrical test stated in NETA ATS. Certify compliance with test parameters. Perform NETA tests and inspections for all adjustable overcurrent protective devices. 3.5 DEMONSTRATION A. Engage Power Systems Analysis Specialist to train Owner's maintenance personnel in the following: 1. Acquaint personnel in fundamentals of operating the power system in normal and emergency modes. 2. Hand-out and explain the coordination study objectives, study descriptions, purpose, basis, and scope. Include case descriptions, definition of terms, and guide for interpreting time-current coordination curves. 3. For Owner's maintenance staff certified as NETA ETT-Certified Technicians Level III or NICET Electrical Power Testing Level III Technicians, teach how to adjust, operate, and maintain overcurrent protective device settings. END OF SECTION SECTION 26 05 73.19 ARC-FLASH HAZARD ANALYSIS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Section includes a computer-based, arc-flash study to determine the arc-flash hazard distance and the incident energy to which personnel could be exposed during work on or near electrical equipment. 1.3 DEFINITIONS A. Existing to Remain: Existing items of construction that are not to be removed and that are not otherwise indicated to be removed, removed and salvaged, or removed and reinstalled. B. One-Line Diagram: A diagram that shows, by means of single lines and graphic symbols, the course of an electric circuit or system of circuits and the component devices or parts used therein. C. Power System Analysis Software Developer: An entity that commercially develops, maintains, and distributes computer software used for power system studies. D. Power Systems Analysis Specialist: Professional engineer in charge of performing the study and documenting recommendations, licensed in the state where Project is located. E. Protective Device: A device that senses when an abnormal current flow exists and then removes the affected portion from the system. F. SCCR: Short-circuit current rating. G. Service: The conductors and equipment for delivering electric energy from the serving utility to the wiring system of the premises served. H. Single-Line Diagram: See "One-Line Diagram." 1.4 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For computer software program to be used for studies. B. Study Submittals: Submit the following submittals after the approval of system protective devices submittals. Submittals shall be in digital form: 1. Arc-flash study input data, including completed computer program input data sheets. 2. Arc-flash study report; signed, dated, and sealed by Power Systems Analysis Specialist. 3. Submit study report for action prior to receiving final approval of distribution equipment submittals. If formal completion of studies will cause delay in equipment manufacturing, obtain approval from Architect for preliminary submittal of sufficient study data to ensure that selection of devices and associated characteristics is satisfactory. 1.5 INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS A. Qualification Data: 1. For Power Systems Analysis Software Developer. 2. For Power System Analysis Specialist. B. Product Certificates: For arc-flash hazard analysis software, certifying compliance with IEEE 1584 and NFPA 70E. 1.6 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Operation and Maintenance Data: 1. Provide maintenance procedures in equipment manuals according to requirements in NFPA 70E. 2. Operation and Maintenance Procedures: In addition to items specified in Section 01 78 23 "Operation and Maintenance Data," provide maintenance procedures for use by Owner's personnel that comply with requirements in NFPA 70E. 1.7 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Study shall be performed using commercially developed and distributed software designed specifically for power system analysis. B. Software algorithms shall comply with requirements of standards and guides specified in this Section. C. Manual calculations are unacceptable. D. Power System Analysis Software Qualifications: An entity that owns and markets computer software used for studies, having performed successful studies of similar magnitude on electrical distribution systems using similar devices. 1. Computer program shall be designed to perform arc-flash analysis or have a function, component, or add-on module designed to perform arc-flash analysis. 2. Computer program shall be developed under the charge of a licensed professional engineer who holds IEEE Computer Society's Certified Software Development Professional certification. E. Power Systems Analysis Specialist Qualifications: Professional engineer in charge of performing the arc-flash study, analyzing the arc flash, and documenting recommendations, licensed in the state where Project is located. All elements of the study shall be performed under the direct supervision and control of this professional engineer. F. Arc-Flash Study Certification: Arc-Flash Study Report shall be signed and sealed by Power Systems Analysis Specialist. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 COMPUTER SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Operation Technology, Inc. 2. Power Analytics, Corporation. 3. SKM Systems Analysis, Inc. B. Comply with IEEE 1584 and NFPA 70E. C. Analytical features of device coordination study computer software program shall have the capability to calculate "mandatory," "very desirable," and "desirable" features as listed in IEEE 399. 2.2 ARC-FLASH STUDY REPORT CONTENT A. Executive summary of study findings. B. Study descriptions, purpose, basis, and scope. Include case descriptions, definition of terms, and guide for interpretation of results. C. One-line diagram, showing the following: 1. Protective device designations and ampere ratings. 2. Conductor types, sizes, and lengths. 3. Transformer kilovolt ampere (kVA) and voltage ratings, including derating factors and environmental conditions. 4. Motor and generator designations and kVA ratings. 5. Switchgear, switchboard, motor-control center, panelboard designations, and ratings. D. Study Input Data: As described in "Power System Data" Article. E. Short-Circuit Study Output Data: As specified in "Short-Circuit Study Output Reports" Paragraph in "Short-Circuit Study Report Contents" Article in Section 26 05 73.13 "Short-Circuit Studies." F. Protective Device Coordination Study Report Contents: As specified in "Coordination Study Report Contents" Article in Section 26 05 73.16 "Coordination Studies." G. Arc-Flash Study Output Reports: 1. Interrupting Duty Report: Three-phase and unbalanced fault calculations, showing the following for each equipment location included in the report: a. Voltage. b. Calculated symmetrical fault-current magnitude and angle. c. Fault-point X/R ratio. d. No AC Decrement (NACD) ratio. e. Equivalent impedance. f. Multiplying factors for 2-, 3-, 5-, and 8-cycle circuit breakers rated on a symmetrical basis. g. Multiplying factors for 2-, 3-, 5-, and 8-cycle circuit breakers rated on a total basis. H. Incident Energy and Flash Protection Boundary Calculations: 1. Arcing fault magnitude. 2. Protective device clearing time. 3. Duration of arc. 4. Arc-flash boundary. 5. Restricted approach boundary. 6. Limited approach boundary. 7. Working distance. 8. Incident energy. 9. Hazard risk category. 10. Recommendations for arc-flash energy reduction. I. Fault study input data, case descriptions, and fault-current calculations including a definition of terms and guide for interpretation of computer printout. 2.3 ARC-FLASH WARNING LABELS A. Comply with requirements in Section 26 05 53 "Identification for Electrical Systems" for self-adhesive equipment labels. Produce a 3.5-by-5-inch (76-by-127-mm) self-adhesive equipment label for each work location included in the analysis. B. Label shall have an orange header with the wording, "WARNING, ARC-FLASH HAZARD," and shall include the following information taken directly from the arc-flash hazard analysis: 1. Location designation. 2. Nominal voltage. 3. Protection boundaries. a. Arc-flash boundary. b. Restricted approach boundary. c. Limited approach boundary. 4. Arc flash PPE category. 5. Required minimum arc rating of PPE in Cal/cm squared. 6. Available incident energy. 7. Working distance. 8. Engineering report number, revision number, and issue date. C. Labels shall be machine printed, with no field-applied markings. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 EXAMINATION A. Examine Project overcurrent protective device submittals. Proceed with arc-flash study only after relevant equipment submittals have been assembled. Overcurrent protective devices that have not been submitted and approved prior to arc-flash study may not be used in study. 3.2 ARC-FLASH HAZARD ANALYSIS A. Comply with NFPA 70E and its Annex D for hazard analysis study. B. Preparatory Studies: Perform the Short-Circuit and Protective Device Coordination studies prior to starting the Arc-Flash Hazard Analysis. 1. Short-Circuit Study Output: As specified in "Short-Circuit Study Output Reports" Paragraph in "Short-Circuit Study Report Contents" Article in Section 26 05 73.13 "Short-Circuit Studies." 2. Coordination Study Report Contents: As specified in "Coordination Study Report Contents" Article in Section 26 05 73.16 "Coordination Studies." C. Calculate maximum and minimum contributions of fault-current size. 1. Maximum calculation shall assume a maximum contribution from the utility and shall assume motors to be operating under full-load conditions. 2. Calculate arc-flash energy at 85 percent of maximum short-circuit current according to IEEE 1584 recommendations. 3. Calculate arc-flash energy at 38 percent of maximum short-circuit current according to NFPA 70E recommendations. 4. Calculate arc-flash energy with the utility contribution at a minimum and assume no motor contribution. D. Calculate the arc-flash protection boundary and incident energy at locations in electrical distribution system where personnel could perform work on energized parts. E. Include medium-and low-voltage equipment locations, except equipment rated 240 V ac or less fed from transformers less than 30 kVA. F. Calculate the limited, restricted, and prohibited approach boundaries for each location. G. Incident energy calculations shall consider the accumulation of energy over time when performing arc-flash calculations on buses with multiple sources. Iterative calculations shall take into account the changing current contributions, as the sources are interrupted or decremented with time. Fault contribution from motors and generators shall be decremented as follows: 1. Fault contribution from induction motors shall not be considered beyond three to five cycles. 2. Fault contribution from synchronous motors and generators shall be decayed to match the actual decrement of each as closely as possible (for example, contributions from permanent magnet generators will typically decay from 10 per unit to three per unit after 10 cycles). H. Arc-flash energy shall generally be reported for the maximum of line or load side of a circuit breaker. However, arc-flash computation shall be performed and reported for both line and load side of a circuit breaker as follows: 1. When the circuit breaker is in a separate enclosure. 2. When the line terminals of the circuit breaker are separate from the work location. I. Base arc-flash calculations on actual overcurrent protective device clearing time. Cap maximum clearing time at two seconds based on IEEE 1584, Section B.1.2. 3.3 POWER SYSTEM DATA A. Obtain all data necessary for conduct of the arc-flash hazard analysis. 1. Verify completeness of data supplied on one-line diagram on Drawings and under "Preparatory Studies" Paragraph in "Arc-Flash Hazard Analysis" Article. Call discrepancies to Architect's attention. 2. For new equipment, use characteristics from approved submittals under provisions of action submittals and information submittals for this Project. 3. For existing equipment, whether or not relocated, obtain required electrical distribution system data by field investigation and surveys conducted by qualified technicians and engineers. 3.4 LABELING A. Apply arc-flash label on the front cover of each section of the equipment and on side or rear covers with accessible live parts and hinged doors or removable plates for each equipment included in the study. Base arc-flash label data on highest values calculated at each location. B. Each piece of equipment listed below shall have an arc-flash label applied to it: 1. Low-voltage switchboard. 2. Switchgear. 3. Medium-voltage switch. 4. Medium voltage transformers 5. Low voltage transformers. Exclude transformers with high voltage side 240 V or less and less than 30 kVA. 6. Panelboard and safety switch over 250 V. 7. Applicable panelboard and safety switch under 250 V. 8. Control panel. C. Note on record Drawings the location of equipment where the personnel could be exposed to arc-flash hazard during their work. 1. Indicate arc-flash energy. 2. Indicate protection level required. 3.5 APPLICATION OF WARNING LABELS A. Install arc-flash warning labels under the direct supervision and control of Power System Analysis Specialist. QTS FTW1 DC1 EXPANSION  21407.0200  ISSUE FOR PERMIT  MARCH 28, 2025  3.6  DEMONSTRATION  A. Engage Power Systems Analysis Specialist to train Owner's maintenance personnel in potential arc-flash hazards associated with working on energized equipment and the significance of arc-flash warning labels. END OF SECTION SECTION 26 08 00 ELECTRICAL GENERAL COMMISSIONING REQUIREMENTS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SUMMARY A. Section includes general requirements that apply to implementation of the required commissioning process without regard to specific systems, assemblies, or components. This scope of work expands upon and is in addition to the scope of work and testing required and indicated on the contract drawings and individual specification sections. B. Follow commissioning procedures and provide support throughout standard level 2, 3, 4 and 5 commissioning procedures as outlined in the contract documents. C. Coordinate and provide appropriate technicians and manufacturer’s representatives, including pre-purchased equipment, as required to meet the schedule and contract requirements. D. Receive, inventory and check against shop drawings and contract drawings all material and equipment received on site including Owner pre-purchased equipment. E. Complete required paperwork for each commissioning level in a timely manner and provide copies to the General Contractor and Commissioning Authority (CxA). Compliance and completeness of paper work will be reviewed regularly and a condition for approval of monthly requisitions. F. Systems to be commissioned and performance benchmarked include all systems related to the data center including but not limited to: 1. Switchgear and switchboards. 2. Automatic transfer switches. 3. Automatic transfer control systems and all possible sequences of operation. 4. Distribution system. 5. Cabling systems. 6. Transformers. 7. Power distribution systems (PDU). 8. Generators and associated control, fuel and alarm systems. 9. Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS) systems. 10. Meters. 11. Fire Alarm System 12. Security System 13. BMS/MAS Control and Monitoring Systems. G. Provide personnel, cooperate and assist with all testing and commissioning of project systems. H. Provide certified qualified personnel to perform start up of equipment and systems and for testing required or specified. I. Provide personnel to support full time, the level 5 testing schedule indicated in Section 01 91 00. Personnel shall include the project foreman and additional personnel as required to operate equipment and support commissioning and integrated testing and the proposed schedule. 1.2 RELATED WORK A. Section 26 00 10 – Basic Electrical Requirements is an integral part of this Section. Requirements and work indicated in Section 26 00 10 are not repeated in this Section. B. Section 01 91 00 – General Data Center Commissioning Requirements, is an integral part of this section. Requirements and work indicated in 01 91 00 are not repeated in this Section. C. Owner’s Project Requirements (OPR) and Basis of Design (BOD) documentation are included by reference for information only. 1.3 DEFINITIONS A. Refer to Section 01 91 00 – General Data Center Commissioning Requirements. B. Levels of Commissioning 1. Level One – Factory Testing 2. Level Two – Component Verification 3. Level Three – System Installation Verification 4. Level Four – Individual System Operation Verification (Acceptance testing to verify all contract requirements have been completed and the systems operate as specified). 5. Level Five – Integrated System Testing –testing to verify and document system operation. 1.4 COMMISSIONING TEAM A. Appoint Individual(s) to be part of the commissioning team, each having the authority to act on behalf of the entity he or she represents, and explicitly organized to implement the commissioning process through coordinated action with all of the project team. 1.5 These representatives shall review and comment where appropriate on all commissioning documents, attend all meetings and coordinate scopes of work with all team members. OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITIES A. Refer to Section 01 91 00 – General Data Center Commissioning Requirements. B. Load banks and cables will be furnished through the Owner’s national contract. 1.6 THIS SECTION’S RESPONSIBILITIES A. Assign representatives with expertise and authority to act on its behalf and shall schedule them to participate in and perform commissioning process activities including, but not limited to, the following: 1. Attend commissioning team meetings held on a weekly basis at the normal meetings and more frequently as level 4 and 5 commissioning get closer and daily during level 4 and 5 commissioning. 2. Integrate and coordinate commissioning process activities with the construction schedule. 3. Review and accept construction checklists provided by the Commissioning Agent (CxA). 4. Complete paper and electronic construction checklists as Work is completed and provide to the Design Team and the Commissioning Authority on a weekly basis. 5. Review, comment and accept commissioning process test procedures provided by the Commissioning Authority. 6. Complete commissioning process test procedures. 7. Assure compliance with the commissioning schedule by organizing and planning to have appropriate personnel, equipment and material available when required. Coordinate vendor’s personnel for all furnished and assigned owner’s pre.purchased equipment. Provide as much advanced notice to vendors as possible. 8. Evaluate performance deficiencies identified in test reports and, in collaboration with entity responsible for system and equipment installation, recommend corrective action. 9. Cooperate with the CxA for resolution of issues recorded in the Issues Log. 1.7 COMMISSIONING AGENT’S (CxA'S) RESPONSIBILITIES A. Refer to Section 01 91 00 – General Data Center Commissioning Requirements. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 LOAD BANKS AND CABLING AS REQUIRED FOR LEVEL 4 AND 5 TESTING A. For the generator testing provide resistive load banks rated for full load of the generator. B. For UPS and battery testing provide resistive load banks for the full load rating of the UPS system. C. For the chiller load system provide load banks for the full load rating of the chiller system using suitcase style load banks located in the computer room. Typical load bank rating is 100kW at 240V derated to 75kW at 208V. D. For Integrated Systems Testing (level 5) provide suitcase style load banks, located in the computer room, for the full load rating of the UPS system plus three spare load banks. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 INSTALLATION A. Suitcase loadbanks – maximum rating of 64kW on a 225A circuit breaker. Do not exceed 80% of CB ampacity rating. B. Evenly space out suitcase load banks in the computer room. The loadbanks shall line up with the edge of the access floor perforated tile, with fans blowing in the opposite direction (towards the hot aisle). Generally, load banks are located at every other row of perforated tiles, blowing towards each other but offset so they blow between each other. Preferably, loadbanks are set approximately 13 ft apart (up to 20 ft if room permits) along the perforated tiles. Do not locate closer than 10 feet from an air conditioner unit. C. Install cables and pigtails with pin and sleeve connector for all load banks. Install load banks and connect cables. Pigtails with pin and sleeve connectors shall be hardwired to CBs to allow quick relocation of load banks during testing. D. Provide connection points and UPS (using temporary panels) power for the load bank control power and fan circuits for the suitcase load banks. E. Coordinate delivery, cable lengths, types and schedules for load banks and testing to maximize efficient common use of the load banks. 3.2 DOCUMENTATION A. Document location of all load banks and direction of airflow on a floor plan that also indicates raised floor tiles, perforated tiles, air conditioning units PDUs and RPPs. END OF SECTION SECTION 26 08 13 TESTING OF ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SUMMARY A. This section includes the following: 1. Electrical acceptance tests by Independent Testing Agency. 2. Responsibilities of the Installer. 3. Test all work furnished or installed under Divisions 26, 27 or 28 of the specifications. 4. This testing is part of the owner’s level 4 (project acceptance) testing. Provide all required documentation as requested by the Owner. 5. Infrared testing for all equipment, conductors, and terminations during load testing will be provided by Owner’s Infrared testing firm. Provide representative color photographs of all locations tested. Test periodically during load testing. Assist and cooperate. 6. Coordinate assist and cooperate with the Owner’s Commissioning Agent. 7. Provide all testing not performed by the Commissioning Agent or infrared testing firm. Provide written reports. B. This specification covers all necessary material, equipment, labor and technical supervision to perform and complete the Electrical Acceptance Tests as required. C. Acceptance tests as herein specified are defined as those tests and inspections required to determine that the equipment involved may be energized for final operational tests and is in accordance with the Contract documents. Final acceptance of the equipment and/or workmanship will depend upon performance characteristics as determined by the subject tests, in addition to complete operational tests, on all electrical equipment to show that it will perform the functions for which it was designed D. These tests are intended to ensure that the workmanship, methods, inspections and materials used in erection and installation of the subject equipment shall conform with accepted engineering practices, ANI, and more specifically: 1. Specifications for the electrical work of the project. 2. Manufacturer's instructions. 3. Listing agency requirements. E. Perform tests specified herein, required by the manufacturer, listed in individual Sections or indicated in the latest version of NETA Standards for Acceptance Testing in accordance with published guides and specifications, specifically NFPA 70B, IEEE, NEMA and other applicable publications. F. Set and verify protective relays and overcurrent devices are adjusted according to the overcurrent device coordination study on the Architect’s instructions. 1.2 RELATED WORK A. Section 26 00 10 – Basic electrical requirements, is an integral part of this section. Requirements and work indicated in 26 00 10 are not repeated in this Section. B. Section 26 08 00 – Commissioning – Coordinate testing with the Commissioning Authority. 1.3 COORDINATION A. Coordinate work under provisions indicated in Section 26 00 10. 1.4 QUALIFICATIONS / QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Conform to requirements indicated in Section 26 00 10. B. Employ the services of a recognized Testing Agency, a member in good standing of the International Electrical Testing Association (NETA), to perform the specified tests as hereinafter covered by this section of the specifications. C. The Testing Agency shall be responsible for all tests and test records. Testing shall be performed by and under the immediate supervision of the test agency and shall be made only by qualified personnel, specifically trained and fully experienced in this type of testing. D. Give Architect and Owner's Representative three days written notice requesting witness before performing all tests. No test shall be done without acknowledgement from the Construction Manager, General Contractor and Owner's Representative. The Installer shall be responsible for clean-up and visual inspection of the equipment immediately prior to the testing. E. Manufacturer's representatives shall be advised of all tests on their equipment. Reasonable cooperation shall be extended to permit witnessing by a representative of the manufacturer of the material under test, should the manufacturer so request. F. The Construction Manager, General Contractor and Architect shall be immediately notified of any unfavorable test results or indication of faulty equipment. No piece of equipment shall be energized until the test data is evaluated and the equipment is proven acceptable. G. If the tests and inspections should indicate deficiencies, make the necessary adjustments, corrections, modifications and replacements necessary to meet the specified requirements. H. Upon completion of the remedial work, the Testing Agency shall repeat all the tests on components previously found deficient on the first test or any additional tests if they be required. It shall be the responsibility and obligation of theinstaller to have all remedial work accomplished as may be required by second and/or additional tests. I. All equipment used shall be certified as calibrated within the last 12 months. 1.5 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS A. Conform to requirements indicated in Section 26 00 10. B. Codes and Standards in addition to Section 26 00 10: 1. NFPA 70B: Electrical Equipment Maintenance. 2. IEEE Testing Guides. 3. ICEA Testing Guides. 4. NEMA Testing Guidelines. 5. NETA Acceptance Testing Specifications (ATS) 1.6 SUBMITTALS A. Submit as required here in and under Section 26 00 10. B. Upon completion of the work herein described, submit Four (4) bound sets of Test and Inspection Reports. Provide information required in the specification, owner’s requirements and NFPA 70B including applicable completed forms. Provide two electronic copies on CD or DVD. C. The report shall indicate deficiencies in the operation of the equipment and installation, fuse sizes, relay settings for protective devices, fault ratings of installed equipment, impedances of equipment and cables to ground, conductor test reports, grounding system, etc. 1.7 EXTRA MATERIALS A. Furnish under provisions indicated in Section 26 00 10. 1.8 PROJECT RECORD DOCUMENTS A. Submit under provisions indicated in Section 26 00 10. B. Update as-built documentation with information gathered during testing. 1.9 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE DATA A. Submit under provisions indicated in Section 26 00 10. 1.10 WARRANTY A. Provide under provisions indicated in Section 26 00 10. QTS FTW1 DC1 EXPANSION ISSUE FOR PERMIT PART 2 -PRODUCTS -NOT USED  21407.0200 MARCH 28, 2025  PART 3 -EXECUTION  3.1 TEST PROCEDURES AND EQUIPMENT A. Perform tests after installation but before energizing the equipment. In addition to or as a supplement of the tests indicated in individual sections the tests and procedures apply to all equipment. Test all work furnished or installed. B. Perform each visual and mechanical inspection and electrical test stated in NETA Acceptance Testing specification. Certify compliance with test parameters. C. Provide written report of all tests and findings. D. Measure tightness of bolted connections and compare torque measurements with manufacturer’s and NRTL’s recommended values. Verify that bolt location, when correctly torqued, is marked with permanent marker. E. Infrared Scanning: During load testing, perform an infrared scan of each splice in cables and conductors No. 3 AWG and larger. Remove box and equipment covers so splices are accessible to portable scanner. 1. Instrument: Use an infrared scanning device designed to measure temperature or to detect significant deviations from normal values. Provide calibration record for device. 2. Record of Infrared Scanning: Prepare a certified report that identifies splices checked and that describes scanning results. Include notation of deficiencies detected, remedial action taken, and observations after remedial action. Include color photographs. F. Remove and replace malfunctioning units and test as specified herein. 3.2 TRANSFORMERS A. Verify transformer taps provide acceptable voltage at utilization equipment connected to substation. Set no load voltage as follows: 1. 480V or 480/277V systems: 492V 2. 208/120V systems: 125V B. Instrument and Control Transformers: 1. Visually inspect for damage and improper connections. 2. Check polarity and ratio by calibration of current transformers. 3. Check mechanical operation of draw-out mechanisms. 3.3 GROUNDING A. Ground Resistance: 1. Visually inspect for specified ground connections. 2. Perform Ground Resistance Test at all connections to switchgear, switchboards, and as specified use two point resistance test. 3. Use four-point fall-of-potential method for exterior ground testing. 4. Perform ground resistance testing of raised floor stringer to stringer and stringer to SRG conductor at locations where SRG conductor is connected to raised floor pedestal. 3.4 CIRCUIT BREAKERS A. Circuit Breakers as Specified: 1. Visually inspect all components for damage. 2. Perform Insulation Resistance Test. 3. Perform Contact Resistance Test. 4. Check calibration of short-time and/or instantaneous devices at rated setting. 5. Check calibration of series over-current or static trip devices at pick-up and at 300 percent of rating. 6. All circuit breakers shall be tested with primary current injection in order to successfully test current transformer and associated wiring. 7. Check operation of circuit breaker and draw-out mechanism. B. Record trip settings of units and protective relays. Verify settings match those specified in the coordination report. 3.5 SWITCHBOARD/SWITCHGEAR A. Visually inspect for damage and improper connections. B. Perform Insulation Resistance Tests. C. Perform High Potential Test on bus. D. Check all accessible bus connections and joints for proper torque. E. Test per latest NETA specifications. F. Verify proper conductor supports for short circuit withstand requirements and to keep stress off terminations as recommended by NEMA, NRTL and manufacturer. 3.6 METERS AND INSTRUMENTS A. Visually inspect for damage and improper connections. B. Check calibration of all indicating instruments C. Check all meters for proper indication. D. Check meter switches for proper function and connections. E. Verify all instrument multipliers. 3.7 CABLES, LOW VOLTAGE (600 VOLTS AND LESS) A. All cables at main switchgear/switchboards and feeders 200A and higher ampacity and all feeders to panels. B. Visually inspect for damage and improper connections. C. Torque test cable connections to manufacturer’s recommended values. D. Perform Insulation Resistance Test. E. Perform Continuity Test. 3.8 MOTOR CONTROLLERS A. Visually inspect for damage and improper connections. B. Test as per applicable items indicated in preceding paragraphs. C. Test overload relays and verify as to proper size. 3.9 MOTORS A. Test and verify proper phasing connections and rotation. B. Verify proper motor overloads are installed. 3.10 TEST REPORTS A. Prepare a written report to record the following: 1. Test procedures used. 2. Test results that comply with requirements. 3. Test results that do not comply with requirements and corrective action taken to achieve compliance with requirements. END OF SECTION SECTION 26 09 23 LIGHTING CONTROL DEVICES PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Section Includes: 1. Time switches. 2. Photoelectric switches. 3. Standalone daylight-harvesting switching and dimming controls. 4. Indoor occupancy and vacancy sensors. 5. Switchbox-mounted occupancy sensors. 6. Digital timer light switches. 7. Lighting contactors. 8. Emergency shunt relays. B. Related Requirements: 1. Section 26 27 26 "Wiring Devices" for wall-box dimmers and manual light switches. 1.3 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For each type of product. B. Shop Drawings: 1. Show installation details for the following: a. Occupancy sensors. b. Vacancy sensors. 2. Interconnection diagrams showing field-installed wiring. 3. Include diagrams for power, signal, and control wiring. 1.4 INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS A. Coordination Drawings: Reflected ceiling plan(s) and elevations, drawn to scale, on which the following items are shown and coordinated with each other, using input from installers of the items involved: 1. Suspended ceiling components. 2. Structural members to which equipment will be attached. 3. Items penetrating finished ceiling, including the following: a. Luminaires. b. HVAC Supply & Return devices. c. Speakers. d. Sprinkler Heads. e. Access panels. f. Control modules. B. Field quality-control reports. C. Sample Warranty: For manufacturer's warranties. 1.5 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Operation and Maintenance Data: For each type of lighting control device to include in operation and maintenance manuals. 1.6 WARRANTY A. Manufacturer's Warranty: Manufacturer and Installer agree to repair or replace lighting control devices that fail(s) in materials or workmanship within specified warranty period. 1. Warranty Period: One year(s) from date of Substantial Completion. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 TIME SWITCHES A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Cooper Industries, Inc. 2. Intermatic, Inc. 3. Leviton Manufacturing Co., Inc. 4. NSi Industries LLC. B. Electronic Time Switches: Solid state, programmable, with alphanumeric display; complying with UL 917. 1. Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70 and marked for intended location and application.. 2. Contact Configuration: DPDT. 3. Contact Rating: 20-A ballast load, 120-/277-V ac. 4. Programs: Two channels; each channel is individually programmable with eight on-off set points on a 24-hour schedule. 5. Astronomic Time: All channels. 6. Automatic daylight savings time changeover. 7. Battery Backup: Not less than seven days reserve, to maintain schedules and time clock. 2.2 OUTDOOR PHOTOELECTRIC SWITCHES A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Cooper Industries, Inc. 2. Intermatic, Inc. 3. Leviton Manufacturing Co., Inc. 4. NSi Industries LLC. B. Description: Solid state, with SPST dry contacts rated for or 1800 VA inductive, to operate connected relay, contactor coils, or microprocessor input; complying with UL 773A, and compatible with ballasts and LED lamps. 1. Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. 2. Light-Level Monitoring Range: 1.5 to 10 fc (16.14 to 108 lux), with an adjustment for turn-on and turn-off levels within that range, and a directional lens in front of the photocell to prevent fixed light sources from causing turn-off. 3. Time Delay: Fifteen-second minimum, to prevent false operation. 4. Surge Protection: Metal-oxide varistor. 5. Mounting: Twist lock complies with NEMA C136.10, with base-and-stem mounting or stem-and-swivel mounting accessories as required to direct sensor to the north sky exposure. 6. Failure Mode: Luminaire stays ON. 2.3 DAYLIGHT-HARVESTING SWITCHING CONTROLS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Cooper Industries, Inc. 2. Hubbell Building Automation, Inc. 3. Leviton Manufacturing Co., Inc. 4. Lithonia Lighting; Acuity Brands Lighting, Inc. 5. NSi Industries LLC. 6. WattStopper; a Legrand® Group brand. B. Description: System operates indoor lighting. C. Sequence of Operation: As daylight increases, the lights are turned off at a predetermined level. As daylight decreases, the lights are turned on at a predetermined level. 1. Lighting control set point is based on two lighting conditions: a. When no daylight is present. b. When significant daylight is present (target level). c. System programming is done with two hand-held, remote-control tools. D. Ceiling-Mounted Switching Controls: Solid-state, light-level sensor unit, with integrated power pack, that detects changes in indoor lighting levels that are perceived by the eye. E. Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: 1. Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. 2. Operating Ambient Conditions: Dry interior conditions, 32 to 120 deg F (0 to 49 deg C). 3. Sensor Output: Digital signal compatible with power pack. 4. Sensor type: Closed loop. 5. Zone: Single. 6. Power Pack: Dry contacts rated for 20-A ballast or LED load at 120-and 277.V ac. a. LED status lights to indicate load status. b. Plenum rated. 7. General Space Sensors Light-Level Monitoring Range: 10 to 200 fc (108 to 2152 lux), with an adjustment for turn-on and turn-off levels within that range. 8. Time Delay: Adjustable from 5 to 300 seconds to prevent cycling. 9. Set-Point Adjustment: Equip with deadband adjustment of 25, 50, and 75 percent above the "on" set point, or provide with separate adjustable "on" and "off" set points. 10. Test Mode: User selectable, overriding programmed time delay to allow settings check. 11. Control Load Status: User selectable to confirm that load wiring is correct. 12. Indicator: Two digital displays to indicate the beginning of on-off cycles. 2.4 DAYLIGHT-HARVESTING DIMMING CONTROLS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Cooper Industries, Inc. 2. Hubbell Building Automation, Inc. 3. Leviton Manufacturing Co., Inc. 4. Lithonia Lighting; Acuity Brands Lighting, Inc. 5. WattStopper; a Legrand® Group brand. B. Description: Sensing daylight and electrical lighting levels, the system adjusts the indoor electrical lighting levels. As daylight increases, the lights are dimmed. 1. Lighting control set point is based on two lighting conditions: a. When no daylight is present (target level). b. When significant daylight is present. 2. System programming is done with two hand-held, remote-control tools. a. Initial setup tool. b. Tool for occupants to adjust the target levels by increasing the set point up to 25 percent, or by minimizing the electric lighting level. C. Ceiling-Mounted Dimming Controls: Solid-state, light-level sensor unit, with separate power pack, to detect changes in indoor lighting levels that are perceived by the eye. D. Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: 1. Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. 2. Sensor Output: 0-to 10-V dc to operate luminaires. Sensor is powered by controller unit. 3. Light-Level Sensor Set-Point Adjustment Range: 20 to 60 fc (120 to 640 lux). E. Power Pack: Digital controller capable of accepting 4 RJ45 inputs with two outputs rated for 20-A ballast load or LED load at 120-and 277-V ac. Sensor has 24-V dc Class 2 power source, as defined by NFPA 70. 1. With integral current monitoring a. Compatible with digital addressable lighting interface. 1) Plenum rated. 2.5 INDOOR OCCUPANCYAND VACANCY SENSORS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Cooper Industries, Inc. 2. Hubbell Building Automation, Inc. 3. Intermatic, Inc. 4. Leviton Manufacturing Co., Inc. 5. Lithonia Lighting; Acuity Brands Lighting, Inc. 6. Lutron Electronics Co., Inc. 7. NSi Industries LLC. 8. WattStopper; a Legrand® Group brand. B. General Requirements for Sensors: 1. Ceiling-mounted, solid-state indoor occupancy and vacancy sensors. 2. Dual technology. 3. Separate power pack. 4. Hardwired connection to switch. 5. Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. 6. Operation: a. Combination Sensor: Unless otherwise indicated, sensor may be programmed to turn lights ON automatically when coverage area is occupied or manually with remote switch. Lights are turned OFF when are is unoccupied. 7. Sensor Output: Contacts rated to operate the connected relay, complying with UL 773A Sensor is powered from the power pack. 8. Power: Line voltage. 9. Power Pack: Dry contacts rated for 20-A ballast or LED load at 120-and 277.V ac. 10. Mounting: a. Sensor: Suitable for mounting in any position on a standard outlet box. b. Relay: Externally mounted through a 1/2-inch (13-mm) knockout in a standard electrical enclosure. c. Time-Delay and Sensitivity Adjustments: Recessed and concealed behind hinged door. 11. Indicator: Digital display, to show when motion is detected during testing and normal operation of sensor. 12. Bypass Switch: Override the "on" function in case of sensor failure. C. Dual-Technology Type: Ceiling mounted; detect occupants in coverage area using PIR and ultrasonic detection methods. The particular technology or combination of technologies that control on-off functions is selectable in the field by operating controls on unit. 1. Sensitivity Adjustment: Separate for each sensing technology. 2. Detector Sensitivity: Detect occurrences of 6-inch-(150-mm-) minimum movement of any portion of a human body that presents a target of not less than 36 sq. in. (232 sq. cm), and detect a person of average size and weight moving not less than 12 inches (305 mm) in either a horizontal or a vertical manner at an approximate speed of 12 inches/s (305 mm/s). 3. Detection Coverage (Standard Room): Detect occupancy anywhere within a circular area of 1000 sq. ft. (93 sq. m) when mounted on a 96-inch-(2440-mm-) high ceiling. 2.6 SWITCHBOX-MOUNTED SYSTEM OCCUPANCY SENSORS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Cooper Industries, Inc. 2. Hubbell Building Automation, Inc. 3. Intermatic, Inc. 4. Leviton Manufacturing Co., Inc. 5. Lithonia Lighting; Acuity Brands Lighting, Inc. 6. Lutron Electronics Co., Inc. 7. NSi Industries LLC. 8. WattStopper; a Legrand® Group brand. B. General Requirements for Sensors: Automatic-wall-switch occupancy sensor with manual on-off switch, suitable for mounting in a single gang switchbox, with provisions for connection to BAS using hardwired connection. 1. Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. 2. Occupancy Sensor Operation: Unless otherwise indicated, turn lights on when coverage area is occupied, and turn lights off when unoccupied; with a time delay for turning lights off, adjustable over a minimum range of 1 to 15 minutes. 3. Operating Ambient Conditions: Dry interior conditions, 32 to 120 deg F (0 to 49 deg C). 4. Switch Rating: Not less than 800-VA ballast or LED load at 120 V, 1200-VA ballast or LED load at 277 V, and 800-W incandescent. C. Wall-Switch Sensor: 1. Standard Range: Provide standard fixed 210-degree field of view or adjustable 180-degree field of view (field adjustable from 180 to 40 degrees); with a minimum coverage area of 900 sq. ft. (84 sq. m) or 2100 sq. ft (196 sq. m) as required. 2. Sensing Technology: PIR. 3. Switch Type: SP, dual circuit., field-selectable automatic "on," or manual "on," automatic "off." 4. Capable of controlling load in three-way application. 5. Voltage: Dual voltage -120 and 277 V. 6. Concealed, field-adjustable, "off" time-delay selector at up to 30 minutes. 7. Adaptive Technology: Self-adjusting circuitry detects and memorizes usage patterns of the space and helps eliminate false "off" switching. 8. Color: White or as selected by Architect. 9. Faceplate: Thermoplastic, color matched to switch. 2.7 SWITCHBOX-MOUNTED STAND-ALONE OCCUPANCY SENSORS A. Wall Sensor Light Switch, Passive Infrared B. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Cooper Industries, Inc. 2. Hubbell Building Automation, Inc. 3. Intermatic, Inc. 4. Leviton Manufacturing Co., Inc. 5. Lithonia Lighting; Acuity Brands Lighting, Inc. 6. Lutron Electronics Co., Inc. 7. NSi Industries LLC. 8. WattStopper; a Legrand® Group brand. C. Description: Switchbox-mounted, combination, lighting-control sensor and conventional switch lighting-control unit using passive infrared technology. 1. Standards: Comply with UL 20. 2. Connections: Hard wired. 3. Rated 960 W at 10 A at 120 V ac or 10 A at 277 V ac for fluorescent or LED lighting. 4. Vacancy Sensor Operation: Unless otherwise indicated, turn lights on when switch is pressed, and turn lights off when coverage area is unoccupied; with a time delay for turning lights off, 5. Adjustable time delay of 10 minutes. 6. Able to be locked to Manual-On mode. 7. Color: White or as selected by Architect. 8. Faceplate: Thermoplastic, color matched to switch. 2.8 DIGITAL TIMER LIGHT SWITCH A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Cooper Industries, Inc. 2. Intermatic, Inc. 3. Leviton Manufacturing Co., Inc. 4. NSi Industries LLC. B. Description: Combination digital timer and conventional switch lighting control unit. Switchbox-mounted, backlit LCD display, with selectable time interval in 10 minute increments. 1. Rated 10 A at 120-V ac or 10 amps at 277-V ac for ballast or LED. 2. Voltage: Dual voltage -120 and 277 V. 3. Color: White or as selected by Architect. 4. Faceplate: Thermoplastic, color matched to switch. 2.9 LIGHTING CONTACTORS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. ASCO: a brand of Vertiv. 2. Eaton. 3. Square D. B. Description: Electrically operated and mechanically held, combination-type lighting contactors with nonfused disconnect, complying with NEMA ICS 2 and UL 508. 1. Current Rating for Switching: Listing or rating consistent with type of load served, including tungsten filament, inductive, and high-inrush ballast (ballast with 15 percent or less THD of normal load current). 2. Fault Current Withstand Rating: Equal to or exceeding the available fault current at the point of installation. 3. Enclosure: Comply with NEMA 250. 2.10 EMERGENCY SHUNT RELAY A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Lighting Control and Design. 2. WattStopper; a Legrand® Group brand. B. Description: NC, electrically held relay, arranged for wiring in parallel with manual or automatic switching contacts; complying with UL 924. 1. Coil Rating: 120 or 277 V. 2.11 CONDUCTORS AND CABLES A. Power Wiring to Supply Side of Remote-Control Power Sources: Not smaller than No. 12 AWG. Comply with requirements in Section 26 05 19 "Low-Voltage Electrical Power Conductors and Cables." PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 EXAMINATION A. Examine lighting control devices before installation. Reject lighting control devices that are wet, moisture damaged, or mold damaged. B. Examine walls and ceilings for suitable conditions where lighting control devices will be installed. C. Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected. 3.2 SENSOR INSTALLATION A. Comply with NECA 1. B. Coordinate layout and installation of ceiling-mounted devices with other construction that penetrates ceilings or is supported by them, including light fixtures, HVAC equipment, smoke detectors, fire-suppression systems, and partition assemblies. C. Install and aim sensors in locations to achieve not less than 90-percent coverage of areas indicated. Do not exceed coverage limits specified in manufacturer's written instructions. 3.3 WIRING INSTALLATION A. Comply with NECA 1. B. Wiring Method: Comply with Section 26 05 19 "Low-Voltage Electrical Power Conductors and Cables." Minimum conduit size is 1/2 inch (13 mm). C. Wiring within Enclosures: Comply with NECA 1. Separate power-limited and nonpower.limited conductors according to conductor manufacturer's written instructions. D. Size conductors according to lighting control device manufacturer's written instructions unless otherwise indicated. E. Splices, Taps, and Terminations: Make connections only on numbered terminal strips in junction, pull, and outlet boxes; terminal cabinets; and equipment enclosures. 3.4 IDENTIFICATION A. Identify components and power and control wiring according to Section 26 05 53 "Identification for Electrical Systems." 1. Identify controlled circuits in lighting contactors. 2. Identify circuits or luminaires controlled by photoelectric and occupancy sensors at each sensor. B. Label time switches and contactors with a unique designation. 3.5 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Perform the following tests and inspections: 1. Operational Test: After installing time switches and sensors, and after electrical circuitry has been energized, start units to confirm proper unit operation. 2. Test and adjust controls and safeties. Replace damaged and malfunctioning controls and equipment. B. Lighting control devices will be considered defective if they do not pass tests and inspections. 3.6 ADJUSTING A. Occupancy Adjustments: When requested within three months from date of Substantial Completion, provide on-site assistance in adjusting lighting control devices to suit actual occupied conditions. Provide up to two visits to Project during other-than-normal occupancy hours for this purpose. 1. For occupancy and motion sensors, verify operation at outer limits of detector range. Set time delay to suit Owner's operations. 2. For daylighting controls, adjust set points and deadband controls to suit Owner's operations. 3.7 DEMONSTRATION A. Train Owner's maintenance personnel to adjust, operate, and maintain all types of lighting control devices. END OF SECTION SECTION 26 12 00 MEDIUM-VOLTAGE TRANSFORMERS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. This Section includes the following types of transformers with medium-voltage primaries: 1. Liquid-filled distribution and power transformers. 2. Dry-type distribution and power transformers. 3. Pad-mounted, liquid-filled transformers. 1.3 DEFINITIONS A. NETA ATS: Acceptance Testing Specification. 1.4 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: Include rated nameplate data, capacities, weights, dimensions, minimum clearances, installed devices and features, location of each field connection, and performance for each type and size of transformer indicated. B. Shop Drawings: Diagram power signal and control wiring. 1.5 INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS A. Coordination Drawings: Floor plans, drawn to scale, on which the following items are shown and coordinated with each other, based on input from installers of the items involved: 1. Underground primary and secondary conduit stub-up location. 2. Dimensioned concrete base, outline of transformer, and required clearances. 3. Ground rod and grounding cable locations. 4. B. Manufacturer Seismic Qualification Certification: Submit certification that transformer assembly and components will withstand seismic forces defined in Section 26 05 48.16 "Seismic Controls for Electrical Systems." Include the following: 1. Basis for Certification: Indicate whether withstand certification is based on actual test of assembled components or on calculation. a. The term "withstand" means "the unit will remain in place without separation of any parts from the device when subjected to the seismic forces specified." b. The term "withstand" means "the unit will remain in place without separation of any parts from the device when subjected to the seismic forces specified and the unit will be fully operational after the seismic event." 2. Dimensioned Outline Drawings of Equipment Unit: Identify center of gravity and locate and describe mounting and anchorage provisions. 3. Detailed description of equipment anchorage devices on which the certification is based and their installation requirements. C. Qualification Data: For testing agency. D. Source quality-control test reports. E. Field quality-control test reports. F. Follow-up service reports. 1.6 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Operation and Maintenance Data: For transformer and accessories to include in emergency, operation, and maintenance manuals. 1.7 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Testing Agency Qualifications: An independent testing agency, with the experience and capability to conduct the testing indicated, that is a member company of the InterNational Electrical Testing Association or is a nationally recognized testing laboratory (NRTL) as defined by OSHA in 29 CFR 1910.7, and that is acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction. 1. Testing Agency's Field Supervisor: Person currently certified by the InterNational Electrical Testing Association or the National Institute for Certification in Engineering Technologies to supervise on-site testing specified in Part 3. B. Product Options: Drawings indicate size, profiles, and dimensional requirements of transformers and are based on the specific system indicated. Refer to Section 01 60 00 "Product Requirements." C. Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, Article 100, by a testing agency acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction, and marked for intended use. D. Comply with IEEE C2. E. Comply with ANSI C57.12.10, ANSI C57.12.28, IEEE C57.12.70, and IEEE C57.12.80. F. Comply with NFPA 70. 1.8 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Store transformers protected from weather and so condensation will not form on or in units. Provide temporary heating according to manufacturer's written instructions. 1.9 PROJECT CONDITIONS A. Service Conditions: IEEE C37.121, usual service conditions except for the following: 1. Exposure to significant solar radiation. 2. Altitudes above 3300 feet (1000 m). 3. Exposure to fumes, vapors, or dust. 4. Exposure to explosive environments. 5. Exposure to hot and humid climate or to excessive moisture, including steam, salt spray, and dripping water. 6. Exposure to seismic shock or to abnormal vibration, shock, or tilting. 7. Exposure to excessively high or low temperatures. 8. Unusual transportation or storage conditions. 9. Unusual grounding-resistance conditions. 10. Unusual space limitations. 1.10 COORDINATION A. Coordinate size and location of concrete bases. Cast anchor-bolt inserts into bases. Concrete, reinforcement, and formwork requirements are specified with concrete. B. Coordinate installation of louvers, doors, spill retention areas, and sumps. Coordinate installation so no piping or conduits are installed in space allocated for medium-voltage transformers except those directly associated with transformers. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 MANUFACTURERS A. Available Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, manufacturers offering products that may be incorporated into the Work include, but are not limited to, the following: B. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Acme Electric Corporation. 2. Cooper Industries. 3. Cutler-Hammer. 4. Federal Pacific Transformer Company*. 5. GE Electrical Distribution & Control. 6. Hammond Manufacturing. 7. Kuhlman Electric Corporation. 8. Pauwels Transformers. 9. Pioneer Transformers. 10. Power Quality International. 11. Siemens Energy & Automation, Inc. 12. Square D; Schneider Electric. 13. Uptegraff, R. E. Mfg. Co. 14. Virginia Transformer Corp. 15. 2.2 PAD-MOUNTED, LIQUID-FILLED TRANSFORMERS A. Description: ANSI C57.12.13,IEEE C57.12.00, IEEE C57.12.22, pad-mounted, 2.winding transformers. Stainless-steel tank base. B. The unit shall be factory filled with the required quantity of type FR3 biodegradable liquid dielectric with a minimum fire point of 350°C. Any substitution to type FR3 biodegradable must meet FM Approval and pre-approved by the Owner and by the Engineer. C. Insulation Temperature Rise: 55 deg C when operated at rated kVA output in a 40 deg C ambient temperature. Transformer shall be rated to operate at rated kilovolt ampere in an average ambient temperature of 30 deg C over 24 hours with a maximum ambient temperature of 40 deg C without loss of service life expectancy. D. Basic Impulse Level: 30 kV. E. Full-Capacity Voltage Taps: Four +/-2-2.5 percent taps, 2 above and 2 below rated high voltage; with externally operable 5-position tap changer for de-energized use and with position indicator and padlock hasp. F. High-Voltage Switch: 300 A, make-and-latch rating of 10-kA RMS, symmetrical, arranged for loop feed with 3-phase, 4-position, gang-operated, load-break switch that is oil immersed in transformer tank with hook-stick operating handle in primary compartment. G. Primary Fuses: 150-kV fuse assembly with fuses complying with IEEE C37.47.[ Rating of current-limiting fuses shall be 50-kA RMS at specified system voltage.] 1. Current-limiting type in dry-fuse holder wells, mechanically interlocked with liquid-immersed switch in transformer tank to prevent disconnect under load. 2. Internal liquid-immersed cartridge fuses. 3. Bay-O-Net liquid-immersed fuses that are externally replaceable without opening transformer tank. 4. Bay-O-Net liquid-immersed fuses in series with liquid-immersed current-limiting fuses. Bay-O-Net fuses shall be externally replaceable without opening transformer tank. 5. Bay-O-Net liquid-immersed current-limiting fuses that are externally replaceable without opening transformer tank. H. Surge Arresters: Distribution class, one for each primary phase; complying with IEEE C62.11 and NEMA LA 1; support from tank wall within high-voltage compartment. Transformers shall have three arresters for loop-feed circuits. I. High-Voltage Terminations and Equipment: Live front with externally clamped porcelain bushings and cable connectors suitable for terminating primary cable. J. High-Voltage Terminations and Equipment: Dead front with universal-type bushing wells for dead-front bushing-well inserts, complying with IEEE 386 and including the following: 1. Bushing-Well Inserts: One for each high-voltage bushing well. 2. Surge Arresters: Dead-front, elbow-type, metal-oxide-varistor units. 3. Parking Stands: One for each high-voltage bushing well. 4. Portable Insulated Bushings: Arranged for parking insulated, high-voltage, load-break cable terminators; one for each primary feeder conductor terminating at transformer. K. Accessories: 1. Drain Valve: 1 inch (25 mm), with sampling device. 2. Dial-type thermometer. 3. Liquid-level gage. 4. Pressure-vacuum gage. 5. Pressure Relief Device: Self-sealing with an indicator. 6. Mounting provisions for low-voltage current transformers. 7. Mounting provisions for low-voltage potential transformers. 8. Busway terminal connection at low-voltage compartment. 9. Alarm contacts for gages and thermometer listed above. 2.3 IDENTIFICATION DEVICES A. Nameplates: Engraved, laminated-plastic or metal nameplate for each transformer, mounted with corrosion-resistant screws. Nameplates and label products are specified in Section 26 05 53 "Identification for Electrical Systems." 2.4 SOURCE QUALITY CONTROL A. Factory Tests: Perform design and routine tests according to standards specified for components. Conduct transformer tests according to IEEE C57.12.90 IEEE C57.12.91. B. Factory Tests: Perform the following factory-certified tests on each transformer: 1. Resistance measurements of all windings on rated-voltage connection and on tap extreme connections. 2. Ratios on rated-voltage connection and on tap extreme connections. 3. Polarity and phase relation on rated-voltage connection. 4. No-load loss at rated voltage on rated-voltage connection. 5. Excitation current at rated voltage on rated-voltage connection. 6. Impedance and load loss at rated current on rated-voltage connection and on tap extreme connections. 7. Applied potential. 8. Induced potential. 9. Temperature Test: If transformer is supplied with auxiliary cooling equipment to provide more than one rating, test at lowest kilovolt-ampere Class OA or Class AA rating and highest kilovolt-ampere Class OA/FA or Class AA/FA rating. a. Temperature test is not required if record of temperature test on an essentially duplicate unit is available. 10. Owner will witness all required factory tests. Notify Architect at least 14 days before date of tests and indicate their approximate duration. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 EXAMINATION A. Examine areas and conditions for compliance with requirements for medium-voltage transformers. B. Examine roughing-in of conduits and grounding systems to verify the following: 1. Wiring entries comply with layout requirements. 2. Entries are within conduit-entry tolerances specified by manufacturer and no feeders will have to cross section barriers to reach load or line lugs. C. Examine walls, floors, roofs, and concrete bases for suitable mounting conditions where transformers will be installed. D. Verify that ground connections are in place and that requirements in Section 26 05 26 "Grounding and Bonding for Electrical Systems" have been met. Maximum ground resistance shall be 5 ohms at location of transformer. E. Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected. 3.2 INSTALLATION A. Install transformers on concrete bases. 1. Anchor transformers to concrete bases according to manufacturer's written instructions, seismic codes at Project, and requirements in Section 26 05 29 "Hangers and Supports for Electrical Systems." 2. Construct concrete bases of dimensions indicated, but not less than 4 inches (100 mm) larger in both directions than supported unit and 4 inches (100 mm) high. 3. Use 3000-psi (20.7-MPa), 28-day compressive-strength concrete and reinforcement as specified in Section 03 30 00 "Cast-in-Place Concrete." 4. Install dowel rods to connect concrete bases to concrete floor. Unless otherwise indicated, install dowel rods on 18-inch (450-mm) centers around full perimeter of base. 5. Install epoxy-coated anchor bolts, for supported equipment, that extend through concrete base and anchor into structural concrete floor. 6. Place and secure anchorage devices. Use supported equipment manufacturer's setting drawings, templates, diagrams, instructions, and directions furnished with items to be embedded. 7. Tack-weld or bolt transformers to channel-iron sills embedded in concrete bases. Install sills level and grout flush with floor or base. B. Maintain minimum clearances and workspace at equipment according to manufacturer's written instructions and NFPA 70. 3.3 IDENTIFICATION A. Identify field-installed wiring and components and provide warning signs as specified in Section 26 05 53 "Identification for Electrical Systems." 3.4 CONNECTIONS A. Ground equipment according to Section 26 05 26 "Grounding and Bonding for Electrical Systems." B. Connect wiring according to Section 26 05 19 "Low-Voltage Electrical Power Conductors and Cables." 3.5 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Manufacturer's Field Service: Engage a factory-authorized service representative to inspect field-assembled components and equipment installation, including connections, and to assist in field testing. Report results in writing. B. Testing Agency: Owner will engage a qualified testing and inspecting agency to perform field tests and inspections and prepare test reports. C. Testing Agency: Engage a qualified testing and inspecting agency to perform the following field tests and inspections and prepare test reports: D. Perform the following field tests and inspections and prepare test reports: 1. After installing transformers but before primary is energized, verify that grounding system at substation is tested at specified value or less. 2. After installing transformers and after electrical circuitry has been energized, test for compliance with requirements. 3. Perform visual and mechanical inspection and electrical test stated in NETA ATS. Certify compliance with test parameters. 4. Test and adjust controls and safeties. Replace damaged and malfunctioning controls and equipment. E. Remove and replace malfunctioning units and retest as specified above. F. Test Reports: Prepare written reports to record the following: 1. Test procedures used. 2. Test results that comply with requirements. 3. Test results that do not comply with requirements and corrective actions taken to achieve compliance with requirements. 3.6 FOLLOW-UP SERVICE A. Voltage Monitoring and Adjusting: If requested by Owner, perform the following voltage monitoring after Substantial Completion but not more than six months after Final Acceptance: 1. During a period of normal load cycles as evaluated by Owner, perform seven days of three-phase voltage recording at secondary terminals of each transformer. Use voltmeters with calibration traceable to National Institute of Science and Technology standards and with a chart speed of not less than 1 inch (25 mm) per hour. Voltage unbalance greater than 1 percent between phases, or deviation of any phase voltage from nominal value by more than plus or minus 5 percent during test period, is unacceptable. 2. Corrective Actions: If test results are unacceptable, perform the following corrective actions, as appropriate: a. Adjust transformer taps. b. Prepare written request for voltage adjustment by electric utility. 3. Retests: After corrective actions have been performed, repeat monitoring until satisfactory results are obtained. 4. Report: Prepare written report covering monitoring and corrective actions performed. B. Infrared Scanning: Perform as specified in Section 26 13 00 "Medium-Voltage Switchgear." END OF SECTION SECTION 26 22 13 LOW-VOLTAGE DISTRIBUTION TRANSFORMERS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Section includes distribution, dry-type transformers with a nominal primary and secondary rating of 600 V and less, with capacities up to 1500 kVA. 1.3 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For each type of product. 1. Include construction details, material descriptions, dimensions of individual components and profiles, and finishes for each type and size of transformer. 2. Include rated nameplate data, capacities, weights, dimensions, minimum clearances, installed devices and features, and performance for each type and size of transformer. 1.4 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Operation and Maintenance Data: For transformers to include in emergency, operation, and maintenance manuals. 1.5 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Inspection: On receipt, inspect for and note any shipping damage to packaging and transformer. 1. If manufacturer packaging is removed for inspection, and transformer will be stored after inspection, re-package transformer using original or new packaging materials that provide protection equivalent to manufacturer's packaging. B. Storage: Store in a warm, dry, and temperature-stable location in original shipping packaging. C. Temporary Heating: Apply temporary heat according to manufacturer's written instructions within the enclosure of each ventilated-type unit, throughout periods during which equipment is not energized and when transformer is not in a space that is continuously under normal control of temperature and humidity. D. Handling: Follow manufacturer's instructions for lifting and transporting transformers. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 MANUFACTURERS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Eaton. 2. General Electric Company. 3. Siemens Industry, Inc., Energy Management Division. 4. Square D; by Schneider Electric. B. Source Limitations: Obtain each transformer type from single source from single manufacturer. 2.2 GENERAL TRANSFORMER REQUIREMENTS A. Description: Factory-assembled and -tested, air-cooled units for 60-Hz service. B. Comply with NFPA 70. 1. Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and use. C. Transformers Rated 15 kVA and Larger: 1. Comply with 10 CFR 431 (DOE 2016) efficiency levels. 2. Marked as compliant with DOE 2016 efficiency levels by an NRTL. D. Shipping Restraints: Paint or otherwise color-code bolts, wedges, blocks, and other restraints that are to be removed after installation and before energizing. Use fluorescent colors that are easily identifiable inside the transformer enclosure. 2.3 DISTRIBUTION TRANSFORMERS A. Comply with NFPA 70, and list and label as complying with UL 1561. B. Provide transformers that are constructed to withstand seismic forces when required as specified in Section 26 05 48.16 "Seismic Controls for Electrical Systems." C. Cores: Electrical grade, non-aging silicon steel with high permeability and low hysteresis losses. 1. One leg per phase. 2. Core volume shall allow efficient transformer operation at 10 percent above the nominal tap voltage. 3. Grounded to enclosure. D. Coils: Continuous windings without splices except for taps. 1. Coil Material: Aluminum. 2. Internal Coil Connections: Brazed or pressure type. 3. Terminal Connections: Bolted. E. Enclosure: Ventilated. 1. NEMA 250, Type 2: Core and coil shall be encapsulated within resin compound to seal out moisture and air. 2. KVA Ratings: Based on convection cooling only and not relying on auxiliary fans. 3. Wiring Compartment: Sized for conduit entry and wiring installation. 4. Finish: Comply with NEMA 250. F. Taps for Transformers 3 kVA and Smaller: None. G. Taps for Transformers 7.5 to 24 kVA: One 5 percent tap above and one 5 percent tap below normal full capacity. H. Taps for Transformers 25 kVA and Larger: Two 2.5 percent taps above and four 2.5 percent taps below normal full capacity. I. Insulation Class, Smaller Than 30 kVA: 180 deg C, UL-component-recognized insulation system with a maximum of 115 deg C rise above 40 deg C ambient temperature. J. Insulation Class, 30 kVA and Larger: 220 deg C, UL-component-recognized insulation system with a maximum of 115 deg C rise above 40 deg C ambient temperature. K. Grounding: Provide ground-bar kit or a ground bar installed on the inside of the transformer enclosure. L. K-Factor Rating: Transformers indicated to be K-factor rated shall comply with UL 1561 requirements for nonsinusoidal load current-handling capability to the degree defined by designated K-factor. 1. Unit shall not overheat when carrying full-load current with harmonic distortion corresponding to designated K-factor, without exceeding the indicated insulation class in a 40 deg C maximum ambient and a 24-hour average ambient of 30 deg C. 2. Indicate value of K-factor on transformer nameplate. 3. Unit shall comply with requirements of DOE 2016 efficiency levels when tested according to NEMA TP 2 with a K-factor equal to one. M. Electrostatic Shielding: Each winding shall have an independent, single, full-width copper electrostatic shield arranged to minimize interwinding capacitance. 1. Arrange coil leads and terminal strips to minimize capacitive coupling between input and output terminals. 2. Include special terminal for grounding the shield. N. Neutral: Rated 200 percent of full load current for K-factor-rated transformers. O. Wall Brackets: Manufacturer's standard brackets. P. Low-Sound-Level Requirements: Maximum sound levels when factory tested according to IEEE C57.12.91, as follows: 1. 9.00 kVA and Less: 40 dBA. 2. 9.01 to 30.00 kVA: 45 dBA. 3. 30.01 to 50.00 kVA: 45 dBA for K-factors of 1, 4, and 9. 4. 50.01 to 150.00 kVA: 50 dBA for K-factors of 1, 4, and 9. 5. 150.01 to 300.00 kVA: 55 dBA for K-factors of 1, 4, and 9. 6. 300.01 to 500.00 kVA: 60 dBA for K-factors of 1, 4, and 9. 2.4 IDENTIFICATION A. Nameplates: Self-adhesive label for each distribution transformer. Self-adhesive labels are specified in Section 26 05 53 "Identification for Electrical Systems." 2.5 SOURCE QUALITY CONTROL A. Test and inspect transformers according to IEEE C57.12.01 and IEEE C57.12.91. 1. Resistance measurements of all windings at rated voltage connections and at all tap connections. 2. Ratio tests at rated voltage connections and at all tap connections. 3. Phase relation and polarity tests at rated voltage connections. 4. No load losses, and excitation current and rated voltage at rated voltage connections. 5. Impedance and load losses at rated current and rated frequency at rated voltage connections. 6. Applied and induced tensile tests. 7. Regulation and efficiency at rated load and voltage. 8. Insulation-Resistance Tests: a. High-voltage to ground. b. Low-voltage to ground. c. High-voltage to low-voltage. 9. Temperature tests. B. Factory Sound-Level Tests: Conduct prototype sound-level tests on production-line products. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 EXAMINATION A. Examine conditions for compliance with enclosure-and ambient-temperature requirements for each transformer. B. Verify that field measurements are as needed to maintain working clearances required by NFPA 70 and manufacturer's written instructions. C. Examine walls, floors, roofs, and concrete bases for suitable mounting conditions where transformers will be installed. D. Verify that ground connections are in place and requirements in Section 26 05 26 "Grounding and Bonding for Electrical Systems" have been met. Maximum ground resistance shall be 5 ohms at location of transformer. E. Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected. 3.2 INSTALLATION A. Install wall-mounted transformers level and plumb with wall brackets fabricated by transformer manufacturer. 1. Coordinate installation of wall-mounted and structure-hanging supports with actual transformer provided. 2. When required, brace wall-mounted transformers as specified in Section 26 05 48.16 "Seismic Controls for Electrical Systems." B. Install transformers level and plumb on a concrete base with vibration-dampening supports. Locate transformers away from corners and not parallel to adjacent wall surface. C. Construct concrete bases according to Section 03 30 00 "Cast-in-Place Concrete" and anchor floor-mounted transformers according to manufacturer's written instructions, seismic codes applicable to Project, and requirements in Section 26 05 29 "Hangers and Supports for Electrical Systems." 1. Coordinate size and location of concrete bases with actual transformer provided. Cast anchor-bolt inserts into bases. Concrete, reinforcement, and formwork requirements are specified with concrete. D. Secure transformer to concrete base according to manufacturer's written instructions. E. Secure covers to enclosure and tighten all bolts to manufacturer-recommended torques to reduce noise generation. F. Remove shipping bolts, blocking, and wedges. 3.3 CONNECTIONS A. Ground equipment according to Section 26 05 26 "Grounding and Bonding for Electrical Systems." B. Connect wiring according to Section 26 05 19 "Low-Voltage Electrical Power Conductors and Cables." C. Tighten electrical connectors and terminals according to manufacturer's published torque-tightening values. If manufacturer's torque values are not indicated, use those specified in UL 486A-486B. D. Provide flexible connections at all conduit and conductor terminations and supports to eliminate sound and vibration transmission to the building structure. 3.4 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Perform tests and inspections with the assistance of a factory-authorized service representative. B. Small (Up to 167-kVA Single-Phase or 500-kVA Three-Phase) Dry-Type Transformer Field Tests: 1. Visual and Mechanical Inspection. a. Inspect physical and mechanical condition. b. Inspect anchorage, alignment, and grounding. c. Verify that resilient mounts are free and that any shipping brackets have been removed. d. Verify the unit is clean. e. Perform specific inspections and mechanical tests recommended by manufacturer. f. Verify that as-left tap connections are as specified. g. Verify the presence of any specified surge arresters and that their ratings are as specified. 2. Electrical Tests: a. Measure resistance at each winding, tap, and bolted connection. b. Perform insulation-resistance tests winding-to-winding and each winding.to-ground. Apply voltage according to manufacturer's published data. In the absence of manufacturer's published data, comply with NETA ATS, Table 100.5. Calculate polarization index: the value of the index shall not be less than 1.0. c. Perform turns-ratio tests at all tap positions. Test results shall not deviate by more than one-half percent from either the adjacent coils or the calculated ratio. If test fails, replace the transformer. d. Verify correct secondary voltage, phase-to-phase and phase-to-neutral, after energization and prior to loading. C. Large (Larger Than 167-kVA Single Phase or 500-kVA Three Phase) Dry-Type Transformer Field Tests: 1. Visual and Mechanical Inspection: a. Inspect physical and mechanical condition. b. Inspect anchorage, alignment, and grounding. c. Verify that resilient mounts are free and that any shipping brackets have been removed. d. Verify the unit is clean. e. Perform specific inspections and mechanical tests recommended by manufacturer. f. Verify that as-left tap connections are as specified. g. Verify the presence of surge arresters and that their ratings are as specified. 2. Electrical Tests: a. Measure resistance at each winding, tap, and bolted connection. b. Perform insulation-resistance tests winding-to-winding and each winding.to-ground. Apply voltage according to manufacturer's published data. In the absence of manufacturer's published data, comply with NETA ATS, Table 100.5. Calculate polarization index: the value of the index shall not be less than 1.0. c. Perform power-factor or dissipation-factor tests on all windings. d. Perform turns-ratio tests at all tap positions. Test results shall not deviate by more than one-half percent from either the adjacent coils or the calculated ratio. If test fails, replace the transformer. e. Perform an excitation-current test on each phase. f. Perform an applied voltage test on all high-and low-voltage windings to ground. See IEEE C57.12.91, Sections 10.2 and 10.9. g. Verify correct secondary voltage, phase-to-phase and phase-to-neutral, after energization and prior to loading. D. Remove and replace units that do not pass tests or inspections and retest as specified above. E. Infrared Scanning: Two months after Substantial Completion, perform an infrared scan of transformer connections. 1. Use an infrared-scanning device designed to measure temperature or detect significant deviations from normal values. Provide documentation of device calibration. 2. Perform two follow-up infrared scans of transformers, one at four months and the other at 11 months after Substantial Completion. 3. Prepare a certified report identifying transformer checked and describing results of scanning. Include notation of deficiencies detected, remedial action taken, and scanning observations after remedial action. F. Test Labeling: On completion of satisfactory testing of each unit, attach a dated and signed "Satisfactory Test" label to tested component. 3.5 ADJUSTING A. Record transformer secondary voltage at each unit for at least 48 hours of typical occupancy period. Adjust transformer taps to provide optimum voltage conditions at secondary terminals. Optimum is defined as not exceeding nameplate voltage plus 5 percent and not being lower than nameplate voltage minus 3 percent at maximum load conditions. Submit recording and tap settings as test results. B. Output Settings Report: Prepare a written report recording output voltages and tap settings. 3.6 CLEANING A. Vacuum dirt and debris; do not use compressed air to assist in cleaning. END OF SECTION SECTION 26 24 13 SWITCHBOARDS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Section Includes: 1. Service and distribution switchboards rated 600 V and less. 2. Surge protection devices. 3. Disconnecting and overcurrent protective devices. 4. Instrumentation. 5. Control power. 6. Accessory components and features. 7. Identification. B. Related Requirements 1. Section 26 05 73.13 "Short Circuit Studies” for Protective Device fault current and short-circuit study requirements. 2. Section 26 05 73.16 "Coordination Studies” for Protective Device coordination study requirements. 3. Section 26 05 73.19 "Arc-Flash Hazard Analysis" for arc-flash analysis and arc-flash label requirements. 1.3 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For each switchboard, overcurrent protective device, surge protection device, ground-fault protector, accessory, and component. 1. Include dimensions and manufacturers' technical data on features, performance, electrical characteristics, ratings, accessories, and finishes. B. Shop Drawings: For each switchboard and related equipment. 1. Include dimensioned plans, elevations, sections, and details, including required clearances and service space around equipment. Show tabulations of installed devices, equipment features, and ratings. 2. Detail enclosure types for types other than NEMA 250, Type 1. 3. Detail bus configuration, current, and voltage ratings. 4. Detail short-circuit current rating of switchboards and overcurrent protective devices. 5. Include descriptive documentation of any optional barriers specified for electrical insulation and isolation. 6. Detail utility company's metering provisions with indication of approval by utility company where applicable. 7. Include evidence of NRTL listing for series rating of installed devices when utilized. 8. Detail features, characteristics, ratings, and factory settings of individual overcurrent protective devices and auxiliary components. 9. Include time-current coordination curves for each type and rating of overcurrent protective device included in switchboards. Submit in PDF format; include selectable ranges for each type of overcurrent protective device. 10. Include schematic and wiring diagrams for power, signal, and control wiring. C. Delegated Design Submittals: 1. For Protective Device Arc-Flash Hazard Study 2. For Protective Device Coordination Study 3. For Protective Device Short Circuit Study 1.4 INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS A. Qualification Data: For Installer. B. Seismic Qualification Data: Certificates, for switchboards, overcurrent protective devices, accessories, and components, from manufacturer. 1. Basis for Certification: Indicate whether withstand certification is based on actual test of assembled components or on calculation. 2. Dimensioned Outline Drawings of Equipment Unit: Identify center of gravity and locate and describe mounting and anchorage provisions. 3. Detailed description of equipment anchorage devices on which the certification is based and their installation requirements. C. Field Quality-Control Reports: 1. Test procedures used. 2. Test results that comply with requirements. 3. Results of failed tests and corrective action taken to achieve test results that comply with requirements. 1.5 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Operation and Maintenance Data: For switchboards and components to include in emergency, operation, and maintenance manuals. 1. In addition to items specified in Section 01 78 23 "Operation and Maintenance Data," include the following: a. Routine maintenance requirements for switchboards and all installed components. b. Manufacturer's written instructions for testing and adjusting overcurrent protective devices. c. Time-current coordination curves for each type and rating of overcurrent protective device included in switchboards. Submit in PDF format; include selectable ranges for each type of overcurrent protective device. 1.6 MAINTENANCE MATERIAL SUBMITTALS A. Furnish extra materials that match products installed and that are packaged with protective covering for storage and identified with labels describing contents. 1. Potential Transformer Fuses: Equal to 10 percent of quantity installed for each size and type but no fewer than two of each size and type. 2. Control-Power Fuses: Equal to 10 percent of quantity installed for each size and type, but no fewer than two of each size and type. 1.7 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Installer Qualifications: An employer of workers qualified as defined in NEMA PB 2.1 and trained in electrical safety as required by NFPA 70E. 1.8 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Deliver switchboards in sections or lengths that can be moved past obstructions in delivery path. B. Handle and prepare switchboards for installation according to NEMA PB 2.1. 1.9 FIELD CONDITIONS A. Environmental Limitations: 1. Do not deliver or install switchboards until spaces are enclosed and weathertight, wet work in spaces is complete and dry, work above switchboards is complete, and HVAC system is operating and maintaining ambient temperature and humidity conditions at occupancy levels during the remainder of the construction period. 2. Rate equipment for continuous operation under the following conditions unless otherwise indicated: a. Ambient Temperature: Not exceeding 104 deg F (40 deg C). b. Altitude: Not exceeding 6600 feet (2000 m). B. Interruption of Existing Electric Service: Do not interrupt electric service to facilities occupied by Owner or others unless permitted under the following conditions and then only after arranging to provide temporary electric service according to requirements indicated: 1. Notify Architect or Construction Manager no fewer than seven days in advance of proposed interruption of electric service. 2. Indicate method of providing temporary electric service. 3. Do not proceed with interruption of electric service without Architect or Construction Manager's written permission. 4. Comply with NFPA 70E. 1.10 COORDINATION A. Coordinate layout and installation of switchboards and components with other construction that penetrates walls or is supported by them, including electrical and other types of equipment, raceways, piping, encumbrances to workspace clearance requirements, and adjacent surfaces. Maintain required workspace clearances and required clearances for equipment access doors and panels. B. Coordinate sizes and locations of concrete bases with actual equipment provided. Cast anchor-bolt inserts into bases. Concrete, reinforcement, and formwork requirements are specified with concrete. 1.11 WARRANTY A. Manufacturer's Warranty: Manufacturer agrees to repair or replace switchboard enclosures, buswork, overcurrent protective devices, accessories, and factory installed interconnection wiring that fail in materials or workmanship within specified warranty period. 1. Warranty Period: One year from date of Substantial Completion. B. Manufacturer's Warranty: Manufacturer's agrees to repair or replace surge protection devices that fail in materials or workmanship within specified warranty period. 1. Warranty Period: One year from date of Substantial Completion. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. Seismic Performance: Switchboards shall withstand the effects of earthquake motions determined according to ASCE/SEI 7. 1. Basis for Certification: Indicate whether withstand certification is based on actual test of assembled components or on calculation. Shake-table testing shall comply with ICC-ES AC156. 2. The term "withstand" means "the unit will remain in place without separation of any parts from the device when subjected to the seismic forces specified." 2.2 SWITCHBOARDS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Eaton. 2. General Electric Company. 3. Siemens Industry, Inc., Energy Management Division. 4. Square D; by Schneider Electric. B. Source Limitations: Obtain switchboards, overcurrent protective devices, components, and accessories from single source from single manufacturer. C. Product Selection for Restricted Space: Drawings indicate maximum dimensions for switchboards including clearances between switchboards and adjacent surfaces and other items. Comply with indicated maximum dimensions. D. Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. E. Comply with NEMA PB 2. F. Comply with NFPA 70. G. Comply with UL 891. H. Front-Connected, Front-Accessible Switchboards: 1. Main Devices: Fixed, individually mounted. 2. Branch Devices: Panel mounted. 3. Sections front and rear aligned. I. Front-and Rear-Accessible Switchboards: 1. Main Devices: Fixed, individually mounted. 2. Branch Devices: Panel and fixed, individually mounted. 3. Sections front and rear aligned. J. Nominal System Voltage: 480Y/277 V. K. Indoor Enclosures: Steel, NEMA 250, Type 1. 1. Enclosure Finish for Indoor Units: Factory-applied finish in manufacturer's standard gray finish over a rust-inhibiting primer on treated metal surface. L. Outdoor Enclosures: Type 3R. 1. Finish: Factory-applied finish in manufacturer's standard color; undersurfaces treated with corrosion-resistant undercoating. M. Barriers: Between adjacent switchboard sections, where required or indicated. N. Space Heaters: Factory-installed electric space heaters of sufficient wattage in each vertical section to maintain enclosure temperature above expected dew point. 1. Space-Heater Control: Thermostats to maintain temperature of each section above expected dew point. 2. Space-Heater Power Source: Transformer, factory installed in switchboard. O. Service Entrance Rating: Switchboards intended for use as service entrance equipment shall contain from one to six service disconnecting means with overcurrent protection, a neutral bus with disconnecting link, a grounding electrode conductor terminal, and a main bonding jumper. P. Utility Metering Compartment: Barrier compartment and section complying with utility company's requirements; hinged sealable door; buses provisioned for mounting utility company's current transformers and potential transformers or potential taps as required by utility company. If separate vertical section is required for utility metering, match and align with basic switchboard. Provide service entrance label and necessary applicable service entrance features. Q. Customer Metering Compartment: A separate customer metering compartment and section with front hinged door, and section with front hinged door, for indicated metering, and current transformers for each meter. Current transformer secondary wiring shall be terminated on shorting-type terminal blocks. Include potential transformers having primary and secondary fuses with disconnecting means and secondary wiring terminated on terminal blocks. R. Bus Transition and Incoming Pull Sections: Where required or indicated, provide additional section matched and aligned with basic switchboard. S. Removable, Hinged Rear Doors and Compartment Covers: Secured by captive thumb screws, for access to rear interior of switchboard. T. Hinged Front Panels: As required to allow access to Utility metering compartments. U. Pull Box on Top of Switchboard, where required: 1. Adequate ventilation to maintain temperature in pull box within same limits as switchboard. 2. Removable covers shall form top, front, and sides. Top covers at rear shall be easily removable for drilling and cutting. 3. Bottom shall be insulating, fire-resistive material with separate holes for cable drops into switchboard. 4. Cable supports shall be arranged to facilitate cabling and adequate to support cables indicated, including those for future installation. V. Buses and Connections: Three phase, four wire unless otherwise indicated. 1. Provide phase bus arrangement A, B, C from front to back, top to bottom, and left to right when viewed from the front of the switchboard. 2. Phase-and Neutral-Bus Material: Hard-drawn copper of 98 percent conductivity, with Copper feeder line connections to circuit breakers. 3. Phase-and Neutral-Bus Material: Tin-plated, high-strength, electrical-grade aluminum alloy with tin-plated aluminum circuit-breaker line connections. 4. Ground Bus: Minimum 1/4-by-2-inch-(6-by-50-mm-) hard-drawn copper of 98 percent conductivity, equipped with mechanical connectors for feeder and branch-circuit ground conductors. 5. Main-Phase Buses and Equipment-Ground Buses: Uniform 100% capacity for entire length of switchboard's main and distribution sections. Provide for future extensions from both ends. 6. Disconnect Links: a. Isolate neutral bus from incoming neutral conductors. b. Bond neutral bus to equipment-ground bus for switchboards utilized as service equipment or separately derived systems. 7. Neutral Buses: 100 percent of the ampacity of phase buses unless otherwise indicated, equipped with mechanical connectors for outgoing circuit neutral cables. Brace bus extensions for busway feeder neutral bus. 8. Isolation Barrier Access Provisions: Provide Isolation as indicated on Drawings. Permit checking of bus-bolt tightness. W. Future Devices: Equip compartments with mounting brackets, supports, bus connections, and appurtenances at full rating of circuit-breaker compartment. 2.3 SURGE PROTECTION DEVICES A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Eaton. 2. General Electric Company. 3. Siemens Industry, Inc., Energy Management Division. 4. Square D; by Schneider Electric. B. Provide a surge protective device with features and functions as specified herein where shown on the drawings and in all emergency system switchboards. C. SPDs: Listed and labeled by an NRTL acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction as complying with UL 1449, Type 1. D. Features and Accessories: 1. Integral disconnect switch. 2. Internal thermal protection that disconnects the SPD before damaging internal suppressor components. 3. Indicator light display for protection status. 4. Form-C contacts rated at 5 A and 250-V ac, one normally open and one normally closed, for remote monitoring of protection status. Contacts shall reverse on failure of any surge diversion module or on opening of any current-limiting device. Coordinate with building power monitoring and control system. 5. Surge counter. E. Peak Surge Current Rating: The minimum single-pulse surge current withstand rating per phase shall not be less than 200 kA. The peak surge current rating shall be the arithmetic sum of the ratings of the individual MOVs in a given mode. F. Protection modes and UL 1449 VPR for grounded wye circuits with 480Y/277 V, three-phase, four-wire circuits shall not exceed the following: 1. Line to Neutral: 1200 V for 480Y/277 V. 2. Line to Ground: 1200 V for 480Y/277 V. 3. Line to Line: 2000 V for 480Y/277 V. G. SCCR: Equal or exceed 200 kA. H. Nominal Discharge Current Rating: 20 kA. 2.4 DISCONNECTING AND OVERCURRENT PROTECTIVE DEVICES A. Molded-Case Circuit Breaker (MCCB): Comply with UL 489, with interrupting capacity to meet available fault currents. 1. Thermal-Magnetic Circuit Breakers: Inverse time-current element for low-level overloads and instantaneous magnetic trip element for short circuits. Adjustable magnetic trip setting for circuit-breaker frame sizes 250 A and larger. 2. Electronic trip circuit breakers with rms sensing; field-replaceable rating plug or field-replicable electronic trip for circuit-breaker frame sizes 1000 A and larger; and the following field-adjustable settings: a. Instantaneous trip. b. Long-and short-time pickup levels. c. Long and short time adjustments. d. Ground-fault pickup level, time delay, and I2T response. 3. For breaker frames 1200A and above, the trip unit shall be provided with an Arcflash Reduction Maintenance System. The Arcflash Reduction Maintenance System shall allow the operator to enable a maintenance mode which enables a preset accelerated instantaneous override trip to reduce arc flash energy. A blue LED on the trip unit shall indicate the trip unit is in the maintenance mode. The use of zone selective interlocking to emulate this feature does not meet the intent of these specifications and will not be accepted. 4. GFCI Circuit Breakers: Single-and double-pole configurations with Class A ground-fault protection (6-mA trip). 5. Ground-Fault Equipment Protection (GFEP) Circuit Breakers: Class B ground-fault protection (30-mA trip). 6. MCCB Features and Accessories (provide as indicated on drawings): a. Standard frame sizes, trip ratings, and number of poles. b. Lugs: Mechanical style, suitable for number, size, trip ratings, and conductor material. c. Ground-Fault Protection: Integrally mounted or Remote-mounted relay and trip unit with adjustable pickup and time-delay settings, push-to-test feature, and ground-fault indicator. d. Zone-Selective Interlocking: Integral with electronic trip unit; for interlocking ground-fault protection function. e. Communication Capability: Communication module with functions and features compatible with power monitoring and control system specified in Section 26 09 13 "Electrical Power Monitoring and Control." f. Shunt Trip: 120-V trip coil energized from separate circuit, set to trip at 75 percent of rated voltage. g. Auxiliary Contacts: Two SPDT switches with "a" and "b" contacts; "a" contacts mimic circuit-breaker contacts, "b" contacts operate in reverse of circuit-breaker contacts. h. Key Interlock Kit: Externally mounted to prohibit circuit-breaker operation; key shall be removable only when circuit breaker is in off position. B. Insulated-Case Circuit Breaker (ICCB): 100 percent rated, sealed, insulated-case power circuit breaker with interrupting capacity rating to meet available fault current. 1. Fixed circuit-breaker mounting. 2. Two-step, stored-energy closing. 3. Microprocessor-based trip units with interchangeable rating plug, trip indicators, and the following field-adjustable settings: a. Instantaneous trip. b. Time adjustments for long-and short-time pickup. c. Ground-fault pickup level, time delay, and I squared t response. 4. The trip unit shall be provided with an Arcflash Reduction Maintenance System. The Arcflash Reduction Maintenance System shall allow the operator to enable a maintenance mode using a 5 position switch which enables a preset accelerated instantaneous override trip to reduce arc flash energy. A blue LED on the trip unit shall indicate the trip unit is in the maintenance mode. The use of zone selective interlocking to emulate this feature does not meet the intent of these specifications and will not be accepted. 5. ICCB Features and Accessories (provide as indicated on drawings): a. Zone-Selective Interlocking: Integral with electronic trip unit; for interlocking ground-fault protection function. b. Communication Capability: Web enabled integral Ethernet communication module and embedded Web server with factory-configured Web pages (HTML file format). Provide functions and features compatible with power monitoring and control system specified in Section 26 09 13 "Electrical Power Monitoring and Control." c. Key Interlock Kit: Externally mounted to prohibit circuit-breaker operation; key shall be removable only when circuit breaker is in off position. d. Control Voltage: 120-V ac or as required. 2.5 INSTRUMENTATION A. Multifunction Digital-Metering Monitor: Microprocessor-based unit suitable for three-or four-wire systems and with the following features: 1. Switch-selectable digital display of the following values with maximum accuracy tolerances as indicated: a. Phase Currents, Each Phase: Plus or minus 0.5 percent. b. Phase-to-Phase Voltages, Three Phase: Plus or minus 0.5 percent. c. Phase-to-Neutral Voltages, Three Phase: Plus or minus 0.5 percent. d. Megawatts: Plus or minus 1 percent. e. Megavars: Plus or minus 1 percent. f. Power Factor: Plus or minus 1 percent. g. Frequency: Plus or minus 0.1 percent. h. Accumulated Energy, Megawatt Hours: Plus or minus 1 percent; accumulated values unaffected by power outages up to 72 hours. i. Megawatt Demand: Plus or minus 1 percent; demand interval programmable from five to 60 minutes. j. Contact devices to operate remote impulse-totalizing demand meter. 2. Mounting: Display and control unit flush or semiflush mounted in instrument compartment door. 2.6 CONTROL POWER A. Control Circuits: 120-V ac, supplied through secondary disconnecting devices from control-power transformer. B. Control-Power Fuses: Primary and secondary fuses for current-limiting and overload protection of transformer and fuses for protection of control circuits. C. Control Wiring: Factory installed, with bundling, lacing, and protection included. Provide flexible conductors for No. 8 AWG and smaller, for conductors across hinges, and for conductors for interconnections between shipping units. 2.7 ACCESSORY COMPONENTS AND FEATURES A. Portable Test Set: For testing functions of solid-state trip devices without removing from switchboard. Include relay and meter test plugs suitable for testing switchboard meters and switchboard class relays. B. Mounting Accessories: For anchors, mounting channels, bolts, washers, and other mounting accessories, comply with requirements in Section 26 05 48.16 "Seismic Controls for Electrical Systems" or manufacturer's instructions. 2.8 IDENTIFICATION A. Mimic Bus: Entire single-line switchboard bus work, as depicted on factory record drawing, on a photoengraved nameplate. 1. Nameplate: At least 0.032-inch-(0.813-mm-) thick anodized aluminum, located at eye level on front cover of the switchboard incoming service section. B. Coordinate mimic-bus segments with devices in switchboard sections to which they are applied. Produce a concise visual presentation of principal switchboard components and connections. C. Service Equipment Label: NRTL labeled for use as service equipment for switchboards with one or more service disconnecting and overcurrent protective devices. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 EXAMINATION A. Receive, inspect, handle, and store switchboards according to manufacturer’s written instructions. 1. Lift or move switchboards with spreader bars and manufacturer-supplied lifting straps following manufacturer's instructions. 2. Use rollers, slings, or other manufacturer-approved methods if lifting straps are not furnished. 3. Protect from moisture, dust, dirt, and debris during storage and installation. 4. Install temporary heating during storage per manufacturer's instructions. B. Examine switchboards before installation. Reject switchboards that are moisture damaged or physically damaged. C. Examine elements and surfaces to receive switchboards for compliance with installation tolerances and other conditions affecting performance of the Work or that affect the performance of the equipment. D. Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected. 3.2 INSTALLATION A. Install switchboards and accessories according to manufacturer’s written instructions and NEMA PB 2.1. B. Equipment Mounting: Install switchboards on concrete base, 4-inch (100-mm) nominal thickness. Comply with requirements for concrete base specified in Section 03 30 00 "Cast-in-Place Concrete." 1. Install conduits entering underneath the switchboard, entering under the vertical section where the conductors will terminate. Install with couplings flush with the concrete base. Extend 2 inches (50-mm) above concrete base after switchboard is anchored in place. 2. Install dowel rods to connect concrete base to concrete floor. Unless otherwise indicated, install dowel rods on 18-inch (450-mm) centers around the full perimeter of concrete base. 3. For supported equipment, install epoxy-coated anchor bolts that extend through concrete base and anchor into structural concrete floor. 4. Place and secure anchorage devices. Use setting drawings, templates, diagrams, instructions, and directions furnished with items to be embedded. 5. Install anchor bolts to elevations required for proper attachment to switchboards. 6. Anchor switchboard to building structure at the top of the switchboard if required or recommended by the manufacturer. C. Temporary Lifting Provisions: Remove temporary lifting eyes, channels, straps and brackets, and temporary blocking of moving parts from switchboard units and components. D. Comply with mounting and anchoring requirements specified in Section 26 05 48.16 "Seismic Controls for Electrical Systems." E. Operating Instructions: Frame and mount the printed basic operating instructions for switchboards, including control and key interlocking sequences and emergency procedures. Fabricate frame of finished wood or metal and cover instructions with clear acrylic plastic. Mount on front of switchboards. F. Install filler plates in unused spaces of panel-mounted sections. G. Install overcurrent protective devices, surge protection devices, and instrumentation. 1. Set field-adjustable switches and circuit-breaker trip ranges. H. Comply with NECA 1. 3.3 CONNECTIONS A. Comply with requirements for terminating feeder bus specified in Section 26 25 00 "Enclosed Bus Assemblies." Drawings indicate general arrangement of bus, fittings, and specialties. B. Comply with requirements for terminating cable trays specified in Section 26 05 36 "Cable Trays for Electrical Systems." Drawings indicate general arrangement of cable trays, fittings, and specialties. C. Bond conduits entering underneath the switchboard to the equipment ground bus with a bonding conductor sized per NFPA 70. D. Support and secure conductors within the switchboard according to NFPA 70. E. Extend insulated equipment grounding cable to busway ground connection and support cable at intervals in vertical run. 3.4 IDENTIFICATION A. Identify field-installed conductors, interconnecting wiring, and components; provide warning signs complying with requirements for identification specified in Section 26 05 53 "Identification for Electrical Systems." B. Switchboard Nameplates: Label each switchboard compartment with a nameplate complying with requirements for identification specified in Section 26 05 53 "Identification for Electrical Systems." C. Device Nameplates: Label each disconnecting and overcurrent protective device and each meter and control device mounted in compartment doors with a nameplate complying with requirements for identification specified in Section 26 05 53 "Identification for Electrical Systems." 3.5 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Tests and Inspections: 1. Acceptance Testing: a. Test insulation resistance for each switchboard bus, component, connecting supply, feeder, and control circuit. Open control and metering circuits within the switchboard, and remove neutral connection to surge protection and other electronic devices prior to insulation test. Reconnect after test. Test all full-function solid state breakers with manufacturer’s test set. b. Test continuity of each circuit. 2. Test ground-fault protection of equipment for service equipment per NFPA 70. 3. Correct malfunctioning units on-site where possible, and retest to demonstrate compliance; otherwise, replace with new units and retest. B. Switchboard will be considered defective if it does not pass tests and inspections. C. Prepare test and inspection reports, including a certified report that identifies switchboards included and that describes scanning results. Include notation of deficiencies detected, remedial action taken, and observations after remedial action. 3.6 ADJUSTING A. Adjust moving parts and operable components to function smoothly, and lubricate as recommended by manufacturer. B. Set field-adjustable circuit-breaker trip ranges as specified and required in Section 26 05 73.16 "Coordination Studies." 3.7 PROTECTION A. Temporary Heating: Apply temporary heat, to maintain temperature according to manufacturer's written instructions, until switchboard is ready to be energized and placed into service in conditioned environment. 3.8 DEMONSTRATION A. Train Owner's maintenance personnel to adjust, operate, and maintain switchboards, overcurrent protective devices, instrumentation, and accessories, and to use and reprogram microprocessor-based trip, monitoring, and communication units. END OF SECTION SECTION 26 24 16 PANELBOARDS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Section Includes: 1. Distribution panelboards. 2. Lighting and appliance branch-circuit panelboards. 3. Load centers. 4. Electronic-grade panelboards. 1.3 DEFINITIONS A. ATS: Acceptance testing specification. B. GFCI: Ground-fault circuit interrupter. C. GFEP: Ground-fault equipment protection. D. HID: High-intensity discharge. E. MCCB: Molded-case circuit breaker. F. SPD: Surge protective device. G. VPR: Voltage protection rating. 1.4 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For each type of panelboard. 1. Include materials, switching and overcurrent protective devices, SPDs, accessories, and components indicated. 2. Include dimensions and manufacturers' technical data on features, performance, electrical characteristics, ratings, and finishes. B. Shop Drawings: For each panelboard and related equipment. 1. Include dimensioned plans, elevations, sections, and details. 2. Show tabulations of installed devices with nameplates, conductor termination sizes, equipment features, and ratings. 3. Detail enclosure types including mounting and anchorage, environmental protection, knockouts, corner treatments, covers and doors, gaskets, hinges, and locks. 4. Detail bus configuration, current, and voltage ratings. 5. Short-circuit current rating of panelboards and overcurrent protective devices. 6. Include evidence of NRTL listing for Series Rating of installed devices. 7. Include evidence of NRTL listing for SPD as installed in panelboard. 8. Detail features, characteristics, ratings, and factory settings of individual overcurrent protective devices and auxiliary components. 9. Include wiring diagrams for power, signal, and control wiring. 10. Key interlock scheme drawing and sequence of operations. 1.5 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Operation and Maintenance Data: For panelboards and components to include in emergency, operation, and maintenance manuals. In addition to items specified in Section 01 78 23 "Operation and Maintenance Data," include the following: 1. Manufacturer's written instructions for testing and adjusting overcurrent protective devices. 1.6 MAINTENANCE MATERIAL SUBMITTALS A. Furnish extra materials that match products installed and that are packaged with protective covering for storage and identified with labels describing contents. 1. Keys: Two spares for each type of panelboard cabinet lock. 2. Circuit Breakers Including GFCI and GFEP Types: Two spares for each panelboard. 1.7 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Manufacturer Qualifications: ISO 9001 or 9002 certified. 1.8 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Remove loose packing and flammable materials from inside panelboards. If space is not yet protected or conditioned, install temporary electric heating (250 W per panelboard) to prevent condensation. B. Handle and prepare panelboards for installation according to NECA 407. 1.9 FIELD CONDITIONS A. Environmental Limitations: 1. Do not deliver or install panelboards until spaces are enclosed and weathertight, wet work in spaces is complete and dry, work above panelboards is complete, and temporary HVAC system is operating and maintaining ambient temperature and humidity conditions at occupancy levels during the remainder of the construction period. 2. Rate equipment for continuous operation under the following conditions unless otherwise indicated: a. Ambient Temperature: Not exceeding minus 22 deg F (minus 30 deg C) to plus 104 deg F (plus 40 deg C). b. Altitude: Not exceeding 6600 feet (2000 m). B. Interruption of Existing Electric Service: Do not interrupt electric service to facilities occupied by Owner or others unless permitted under the following conditions and then only after arranging to provide temporary electric service according to requirements indicated: 1. Notify Architect or Construction Manager no fewer than seven days in advance of proposed interruption of electric service. 2. Indicate method of providing temporary electrical service. 3. Do not proceed with interruption of electric service without Architect or Construction Manager's written permission. 4. Comply with NFPA 70E. 1.10 WARRANTY A. Manufacturer's Warranty: Manufacturer agrees to repair or replace panelboards that fail in materials or workmanship within specified warranty period. 1. Panelboard Warranty Period: One year from date of Substantial Completion. B. Special Warranty: Manufacturer's standard form in which manufacturer agrees to repair or replace SPD that fails in materials or workmanship within specified warranty period. 1. SPD Warranty Period: One year from date of Substantial Completion. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 PANELBOARDS AND LOAD CENTERS COMMON REQUIREMENTS A. Fabricate and test panelboards according to IEEE 344 to withstand seismic forces defined in Section 26 05 48.16 "Seismic Controls for Electrical Systems." B. Product Selection for Restricted Space: Drawings indicate maximum dimensions for panelboards including clearances between panelboards and adjacent surfaces and other items. Comply with indicated maximum dimensions. C. Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. D. Comply with NEMA PB 1. E. Comply with NFPA 70. F. Enclosures: Flush and Surface-mounted, dead-front cabinets. 1. Rated for environmental conditions at installed location. Provide as generally indicated below or as indicated on drawings. a. Indoor Dry and Clean Locations: NEMA 250, Type 1. b. Outdoor Locations: NEMA 250, Type 3R. c. Kitchen and Wash-Down Areas: NEMA 250, Type 4X, stainless steel. d. Other Wet or Damp Indoor Locations: NEMA 250, Type 4. e. Indoor Locations Subject to Dust, Falling Dirt, and Dripping Noncorrosive Liquids: NEMA 250, Type 12. 2. Height: 84 inches (2.13 m) maximum. 3. Front: Secured to box with concealed trim clamps. For surface-mounted fronts, match box dimensions; for flush-mounted fronts, overlap box. Trims shall cover all live parts and shall have no exposed hardware. 4. Finishes: a. Panels and Trim: Steel, factory finished immediately after cleaning and pretreating with manufacturer's standard two-coat, baked-on finish consisting of prime coat and thermosetting topcoat. b. Back Boxes: Galvanized steel. G. Incoming Mains: 1. Location: Top or Bottom as indicated on drawings or as required by Project conditions. 2. Main Breaker: Main lug interiors up to 400 amperes shall be field convertible to main breaker. H. Phase, Neutral, and Ground Buses: 1. Material: Hard-drawn copper, 98 percent conductivity. a. Plating shall run entire length of bus. b. Bus shall be fully rated the entire length. 2. Interiors shall be factory assembled into a unit. Replacing switching and protective devices shall not disturb adjacent units or require removing the main bus connectors. 3. Equipment Ground Bus: Adequate for feeder and branch-circuit equipment grounding conductors; bonded to box. 4. Isolated Ground Bus: Where specifically indicated, provide for branch-circuit isolated ground conductors; insulated from box. 5. Full-Sized Neutral: Equipped with optional full-capacity bonding strap for service entrance applications. Mount electrically isolated from enclosure. Do not mount neutral bus in gutter. I. Conductor Connectors: Suitable for use with conductor material and sizes. 1. Material: Tin-plated aluminum. 2. Terminations shall allow use of 75 deg C rated conductors without derating. 3. Size: Lugs suitable for indicated conductor sizes, with additional gutter space, if required, for larger conductors. 4. Main and Neutral Lugs: Mechanical type, with a lug on the neutral bar for each pole in the panelboard. 5. Ground Lugs and Bus-Configured Terminators: Mechanical type, with a lug on the bar for each pole in the panelboard. 6. Feed-Through Lugs: Mechanical type, where indicated, suitable for use with conductor material. Locate at opposite end of bus from incoming lugs or main device. 7. Subfeed (Double) Lugs: Mechanical type, where indicated, suitable for use with conductor material. Locate at same end of bus as incoming lugs or main device. J. NRTL Label: Panelboards or load centers shall be labeled by an NRTL acceptable to authority having jurisdiction when used as service equipment with one or more main service disconnecting and overcurrent protective devices. Panelboards or load centers shall have meter enclosures, wiring, connections, and other provisions for utility metering. Coordinate with utility company for exact requirements. K. Future Devices: Panelboards or load centers shall have mounting brackets, bus connections, filler plates, and necessary appurtenances required for future installation of devices. 1. Percentage of Future Space Capacity: Ten percent. L. Panelboard Short-Circuit Current Rating: Rated for series-connected system with integral or remote upstream overcurrent protective devices and labeled by an NRTL. Include label or manual with size and type of allowable upstream and branch devices listed and labeled by an NRTL for series-connected short-circuit rating. 1. Panelboards rated 240 V or less shall have short-circuit ratings as shown on Drawings, but not less than 10,000 A rms symmetrical. 2. Panelboards rated above 240 V and less than 600 V shall have short-circuit ratings as shown on Drawings, but not less than 14,000 A rms symmetrical. M. Panelboard Short-Circuit Current Rating: Fully rated to interrupt symmetrical short-circuit current available at terminals. Assembly listed by an NRTL for 100 percent interrupting capacity. 1. Panelboards and overcurrent protective devices rated 240 V or less shall have short-circuit ratings as shown on Drawings, but not less than 10,000 A rms symmetrical. 2. Panelboards and overcurrent protective devices rated above 240 V and less than 600 V shall have short-circuit ratings as shown on Drawings, but not less than 14,000 A rms symmetrical. 2.2 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. Seismic Performance: Panelboards shall withstand the effects of earthquake motions determined according to ASCE/SEI 7. 1. The term "withstand" means "the unit will remain in place without separation of any parts from the device when subjected to the seismic forces specified." B. Surge Suppression: Factory installed as an integral part of indicated panelboards, complying with UL 1449 SPD Type 1. 2.3 POWER PANELBOARDS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Eaton. 2. General Electric Company; GE Energy Management -Electrical Distribution. 3. Siemens Industry, Inc., Energy Management Division. 4. Square D; by Schneider Electric. B. Panelboards: NEMA PB 1, distribution type. C. Doors: Secured with vault-type latch with tumbler lock; keyed alike. 1. For doors more than 36 inches (914 mm) high, provide two latches, keyed alike. D. Mains: Circuit breaker or Lugs only as indicated on schedules. E. Branch Overcurrent Protective Devices for Circuit-Breaker Frame Sizes 125 A and Smaller: Bolt-on circuit breakers or Plug-in circuit breakers where individual positive-locking device requires mechanical release for removal. F. Branch Overcurrent Protective Devices for Circuit-Breaker Frame Sizes Larger Than 125 A: Bolt-on circuit breakers or Plug-in circuit breakers where individual positive-locking device requires mechanical release for removal. 2.4 LIGHTING AND APPLIANCE BRANCH-CIRCUIT PANELBOARDS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Eaton. 2. General Electric Company; GE Energy Management -Electrical Distribution. 3. Siemens Industry, Inc., Energy Management Division. 4. Square D; by Schneider Electric. B. Panelboards: NEMA PB 1, lighting and appliance branch-circuit type. C. Branch Overcurrent Protective Devices: Bolt-on circuit breakers, replaceable without disturbing adjacent units. D. Doors: Concealed hinges; secured with flush latch with tumbler lock; keyed alike. 2.5 LOAD CENTERS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Eaton. 2. General Electric Company; GE Energy Management -Electrical Distribution. 3. Siemens Industry, Inc., Energy Management Division. 4. Square D; by Schneider Electric. B. Load Centers: Comply with UL 67. C. Mains: Circuit breaker. D. Branch Overcurrent Protective Devices: Plug-in circuit breakers, replaceable without disturbing adjacent units. E. Doors: Concealed hinges secured with flush latch with tumbler lock; keyed alike. F. Conductor Connectors: Mechanical type for main, neutral, and ground lugs and buses. 2.6 DISCONNECTING AND OVERCURRENT PROTECTIVE DEVICES A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Eaton. 2. General Electric Company; GE Energy Management -Electrical Distribution. 3. Siemens Industry, Inc., Energy Management Division. 4. Square D; by Schneider Electric. B. MCCB: Comply with UL 489, with interrupting capacity to meet available fault currents. 1. Thermal-Magnetic Circuit Breakers: a. Inverse time-current element for low-level overloads. b. Instantaneous magnetic trip element for short circuits. c. Adjustable magnetic trip setting for circuit-breaker frame sizes 250 A and larger. 2. Adjustable Instantaneous-Trip Circuit Breakers: Magnetic trip element with front-mounted, field-adjustable trip setting. 3. Electronic Trip Circuit Breakers: a. RMS sensing. b. Field-replaceable rating plug or electronic trip. c. Digital display of settings, trip targets, and indicated metering displays. d. Multi-button keypad to access programmable functions and monitored data. e. Ten-event, trip-history log. Each trip event shall be recorded with type, phase, and magnitude of fault that caused the trip. f. Integral test jack for connection to portable test set or laptop computer. g. Field-Adjustable Settings (where specifically indicated): 1) Instantaneous trip. 2) Long-and short-time pickup levels. 3) Long and short time adjustments. 4) Ground-fault pickup level, time delay, and I squared T response. 4. GFCI Circuit Breakers: Single-and double-pole configurations with Class A ground-fault protection (6-mA trip). 5. GFEP Circuit Breakers: Class B ground-fault protection (30-mA trip). 6. Arc-Fault Circuit Interrupter Circuit Breakers: Comply with UL 1699; 120/240-V, single-pole configuration. 7. Subfeed Circuit Breakers: Vertically mounted. 8. MCCB Features and Accessories: a. Standard frame sizes, trip ratings, and number of poles. b. Breaker handle indicates tripped status. c. UL listed for reverse connection without restrictive line or load ratings. d. Lugs: Mechanical style, suitable for number, size, trip ratings, and conductor materials. e. Ground-Fault Protection: Integrally or Remote-mounted relay and trip unit with adjustable pickup and time-delay settings, push-to-test feature, and ground-fault indicator. f. Shunt Trip: 120-V trip coil energized from separate circuit, set to trip at 55 percent of rated voltage. g. Rating Plugs: Three-pole breakers with ampere ratings greater than 250 amperes shall have interchangeable rating plugs or electronic adjustable trip units. 2.7 IDENTIFICATION A. Panelboard Label: Manufacturer's name and trademark, voltage, amperage, number of phases, and number of poles shall be located on the interior of the panelboard door. B. Breaker Labels: Faceplate shall list current rating, UL and IEC certification standards, and AIC rating. C. Circuit Directory: Factory directory card or Contractor-provided computer-generated circuit directory mounted inside panelboard door with transparent plastic protective cover. 1. Circuit directory shall identify specific purpose with detail sufficient to distinguish it from all other circuits. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 EXAMINATION A. Verify actual conditions with field measurements prior to ordering panelboards to verify that equipment fits in allocated space in, and comply with, minimum required clearances specified in NFPA 70. B. Receive, inspect, handle, and store panelboards according to NECA 407. C. Examine panelboards before installation. Reject panelboards that are damaged, rusted, or have been subjected to water saturation. D. Examine elements and surfaces to receive panelboards for compliance with installation tolerances and other conditions affecting performance of the Work. E. Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected. 3.2 INSTALLATION A. Coordinate layout and installation of panelboards and components with other construction that penetrates walls or is supported by them, including electrical and other types of equipment, raceways, piping, encumbrances to workspace clearance requirements, and adjacent surfaces. Maintain required workspace clearances and required clearances for equipment access doors and panels. B. Comply with NECA 1. C. Install panelboards and accessories according to NECA 407. D. Equipment Mounting: 1. Attach panelboard to the vertical finished or structural surface behind the panelboard. 2. Comply with requirements for seismic control devices specified in Section 26 05 48.16 "Seismic Controls for Electrical Systems." E. Comply with mounting and anchoring requirements specified in Section 26 05 48.16 "Seismic Controls for Electrical Systems." F. Mount panelboard cabinet plumb and rigid without distortion of box. G. Mount recessed panelboards with fronts uniformly flush with wall finish and mating with back box. H. Mount surface-mounted panelboards to steel slotted supports 5/8 inch (16 mm) in depth. Orient steel slotted supports vertically. I. Install overcurrent protective devices and controllers not already factory installed. 1. Set field-adjustable, circuit-breaker trip ranges. 2. Tighten bolted connections and circuit breaker connections using calibrated torque wrench or torque screwdriver per manufacturer's written instructions. J. Make grounding connections and bond neutral for services and separately derived systems to ground. Make connections to grounding electrodes, separate grounds for isolated ground bars, and connections to separate ground bars. K. Install filler plates in unused spaces. L. When panelboards are installed flush in finished areas: Stub four 1-inch (25 mm) empty conduits from panelboard into accessible ceiling space or space designated to be ceiling space in the future. Stub four 1-inch (25 mm) empty conduits into raised floor space or below slab not on grade. M. Arrange conductors in gutters into groups and bundle and wrap with wire ties after completing load balancing. 3.3 IDENTIFICATION A. Identify field-installed conductors, interconnecting wiring, and components; install warning signs complying with requirements in Section 26 05 53 "Identification for Electrical Systems." B. Create a directory to indicate installed circuit loads after balancing panelboard loads; incorporate Owner's final room designations. Obtain approval before installing. Handwritten directories are not acceptable. Install directory inside panelboard door. C. Panelboard Nameplates: Label each panelboard with a nameplate complying with requirements for identification specified in Section 26 05 53 "Identification for Electrical Systems." D. Device Nameplates: Label each branch circuit device in power panelboards with a nameplate complying with requirements for identification specified in Section 26 05 53 "Identification for Electrical Systems." E. Install warning signs complying with requirements in Section 26 05 53 "Identification for Electrical Systems" identifying source of remote circuit. 3.4 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Manufacturer's Field Service: Engage a factory-authorized service representative to inspect, test, and adjust components, assemblies, and equipment installations, including connections. B. Perform tests and inspections. 1. Manufacturer's Field Service: Engage a factory-authorized service representative to inspect components, assemblies, and equipment installations, including connections, and to assist in testing. C. Acceptance Testing Preparation: 1. Test insulation resistance for each panelboard bus, component, connecting supply, feeder, and control circuit. 2. Test continuity of each circuit. D. Tests and Inspections: 1. Perform each visual and mechanical inspection and electrical test for low-voltage air circuit breakers and low-voltage surge arrestors stated in NETA ATS, Paragraph 7.6 Circuit Breakers and Paragraph 7.19.1 Surge Arrestors, Low-Voltage. Perform optional tests. Certify compliance with test parameters. 2. Correct malfunctioning units on-site, where possible, and retest to demonstrate compliance; otherwise, replace with new units and retest. 3. Perform the following infrared scan tests and inspections and prepare reports: a. Initial Infrared Scanning: After Substantial Completion, but not more than 60 days after Final Acceptance, perform an infrared scan of each panelboard. Remove front panels so joints and connections are accessible to portable scanner. b. Follow-up Infrared Scanning: Perform an additional follow-up infrared scan of each panelboard 11 months after date of Substantial Completion. c. Instruments and Equipment: 1) Use an infrared scanning device designed to measure temperature or to detect significant deviations from normal values. Provide calibration record for device. E. Panelboards will be considered defective if they do not pass tests and inspections. F. Prepare test and inspection reports, including a certified report that identifies panelboards included and that describes scanning results, with comparisons of the two scans. Include notation of deficiencies detected, remedial action taken, and observations after remedial action. 3.5 ADJUSTING A. Adjust moving parts and operable components to function smoothly, and lubricate as recommended by manufacturer. B. Set field-adjustable circuit-breaker trip ranges as specified in required Coordination Studies. C. Load Balancing: After Substantial Completion, but not more than 60 days after Final Acceptance, measure load balancing and make circuit changes. Prior to making circuit changes to achieve load balancing, inform Owner of effect on phase color coding. 1. Measure loads during period of normal facility operations. 2. Perform circuit changes to achieve load balancing outside normal facility operation schedule or at times directed by the Owner. Avoid disrupting services such as fax machines and on-line data processing, computing, transmitting, and receiving equipment. 3. After changing circuits to achieve load balancing, recheck loads during normal facility operations. Record load readings before and after changing circuits to achieve load balancing. 4. Tolerance: Maximum difference between phase loads, within a panelboard, shall not exceed 20 percent. 3.6 PROTECTION A. Temporary Heating: Prior to energizing panelboards, apply temporary heat to maintain temperature according to manufacturer's written instructions. END OF SECTION SECTION 26 25 00 ENCLOSED BUS ASSEMBLIES PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Section Includes: 1. Feeder-bus assemblies. 2. Plug-in bus assemblies. 3. Bus plug-in devices. 1.3 DEFINITIONS A. kAIC: kiloampere interrupting capacity. B. SPD: Surge protective device. 1.4 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Shop Drawings: For each type of product. 1. Show fabrication and installation details for enclosed bus assemblies. Include plans, elevations, and sections of components. Designate components and accessories, including clamps, brackets, hanger rods, connectors, straight lengths, and fittings. 2. Show fittings, materials, fabrication, and installation methods for listed firestop barriers and weather barriers. 3. Indicate required clearances, method of field assembly, and location and size of each field connection. 4. Detail connections to switchgear, switchboards, transformers, and panelboards. 5. Cable and conductor terminal sizes for bus and plug-in device terminations. 6. Wiring Diagrams: Power, signal, and control wiring. B. Delegated-Design Submittal: For seismic-restraint details, signed and sealed by a qualified professional engineer. 1. Include design calculations for selecting seismic restraints. 2. Detail fabrication, including anchorages and attachments to structure and to supported equipment. 1.5 INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS A. Coordination Drawings: Floor plans and sections, drawn to scale. Include scaled bus-assembly layouts and relationships between components and adjacent structural, mechanical, and electrical elements. Show the following: 1. Vertical and horizontal enclosed bus-assembly runs, offsets, and transitions. 2. Clearances for access above and to the side of enclosed bus assemblies. 3. Vertical elevation of enclosed bus assemblies above the floor or bottom of structure. 4. Support locations, type of support, and weight on each support. 5. Location of adjacent construction elements including luminaires, HVAC and plumbing equipment, fire sprinklers and piping, signal and control devices, and other equipment. B. Field quality-control reports. 1.6 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Operation and Maintenance Data: For enclosed bus assemblies to include in emergency, operation, and maintenance manuals. 1.7 MAINTENANCE MATERIAL SUBMITTALS A. Furnish extra materials that match products installed and that are packaged with protective covering for storage and identified with labels describing contents. 1. Plug-in Units: 10 percent of amount installed for each size indicated, but no fewer than 3 unit(s). 1.8 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Testing Agency Qualifications: Member company of NETA. 1. Testing Agency's Field Supervisor: Certified by NETA to supervise on-site testing. 1.9 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Deliver, store, and handle enclosed bus assemblies according to NEMA BU 1.1, "General Instructions for Handling, Installation, Operation, and Maintenance of Busway Rated 600 Volts or Less." PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 ASSEMBLY DESCRIPTIONS A. Source Limitations: Obtain enclosed bus assemblies and plug-in devices from single source from single manufacturer. B. Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. C. Comply with UL 857. 2.2 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. Seismic Performance: Enclosed bus assemblies, plug-in devices, and components shall withstand the effects of earthquake motions determined according to ASCE/SEI 7. 1. The term "withstand" means "the unit will remain in place without separation of any parts when subjected to the seismic forces specified." B. Derate enclosed bus assemblies for continuous operation at indicated ampere ratings for ambient temperature not exceeding 140 deg F (60 deg C). 2.3 ENCLOSED BUS ASSEMBLIES A. Feeder-Bus Assemblies: Low-impedance bus assemblies in totally enclosed, nonventilated housing; single-bolt joints; ratings as indicated. 1. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: a. Eaton. b. General Electric Company. c. Siemens Industry, Inc., Energy Management Division. d. Square D; by Schneider Electric. 2. Seismic Fabrication Requirements: Fabricate mounting provisions and attachments for feeder-bus assemblies with reinforcement strong enough to withstand seismic forces defined in Section 26 05 48.16 "Seismic Controls for Electrical Systems" when mounting provisions and attachments are anchored to building structure 3. Electrical Characteristics: a. Voltage: 480 V. b. Phase: Three; 3 wire. c. Percent of Neutral Capacity: 100. 4. Short-Circuit Interrupting Rating: a. For Bus Amperage of 800: 85 symmetrical kAIC. b. For Bus Amperage of 1200: 100 symmetrical kAIC. c. For Bus Amperage of 1600: 125 symmetrical kAIC. d. For Bus Amperage of 2500: 150 symmetrical kAIC. e. For Bus Amperage of 5000: 200 symmetrical kAIC. 5. Temperature Rise: 55 deg C above 40 deg C ambient maximum for continuous rated current. 6. Bus Materials: Current-carrying copper conductors, fully insulated with Class 130C insulation except at joints; plated surface at joints. 7. Voltage Drop: a. Measure voltage drop at 30 deg C ambient with bus thermally stabilized at full rated load. b. Three-phase, line-to-line voltage drop less than 3.1 V per 100 feet (30.5 m) at 40 percent power factor. 8. Ground: 50 percent capacity, internal bus bar of material matching bus material. 9. Enclosure: Steel, with manufacturer's standard finish. 10. Fittings and Accessories: Manufacturer's standard. 11. Firestop: Comply with UL 1479 firestop system, listed and labeled by an NRTL acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction for penetrations of fire-rated walls, ceilings, and floors. 12. Mounting: Arranged flat, edgewise, or vertically without derating. Rated for hanger spacing of up to 10 feet (3 m) for horizontally mounted runs and up to 16 feet (5 m) for vertically mounted runs. 13. Expansion Section: Manufacturer's standard expansion fitting for the provided busway with expansion capability to accommodate thermal expansion of bus and enclosure, and to accommodate movement across building expansion joints. B. Plug-in Bus Assemblies: Low-impedance bus assemblies in totally enclosed, nonventilated housing; single-bolt joints; ratings as indicated. 1. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: a. Eaton. b. General Electric Company; GE Energy Management -Electrical Distribution. c. Siemens Industry, Inc., Energy Management Division. d. Square D; by Schneider Electric. 2. Electrical Characteristics: a. Voltage: 480 V. b. Phase: Three; 3 wire. c. Percent of Neutral Capacity: 100. 3. Short-Circuit Interrupting Rating: a. For Bus Amperage of 800: 85 symmetrical kAIC. b. For Bus Amperage of 1200: 100 symmetrical kAIC. c. For Bus Amperage of 1600: 125 symmetrical kAIC. d. For Bus Amperage of 2500: 150 symmetrical kAIC. e. For Bus Amperage of 5000: 200 symmetrical kAIC. 4. Temperature Rise: 55 deg C above 40 deg C ambient maximum for continuous rated current. 5. Bus Materials: Current-carrying copper conductors, fully insulated with Class 130C insulation except at stabs and joints; plated surface at stabs and joints. 6. Ground: 50 percent capacity, internal bus bar of material matching bus material. 7. Enclosure: Steel, with manufacturer's standard finish. 8. Plug-in Openings: 24 inches (600 mm) o.c. on each side of bus, and hinged covers over unused openings. Plug-in openings shall be finger-safe with covers open or closed. 9. Fittings and Accessories: Manufacturer's standard. 10. Firestop: Comply with UL 1479 firestop system, listed and labeled by an NRTL acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction for penetrations of fire-rated walls, ceilings, and floors. 11. Mounting: Arranged flat, edgewise, or vertically without derating. Rated for hanger spacing of up to 10 feet (3 m) for horizontally mounted runs and up to 16 feet (5 m) for vertically mounted runs. 12. Expansion Section: Manufacturer's standard expansion fitting for the provided busway with expansion capability to accommodate thermal expansion of bus and enclosure, and to accommodate movement across building expansion joints. C. Joints: 1. Busway joints shall use one high-strength steel bolt with Belleville washers. 2. Bolts shall be torque indicating type and at ground potential. 3. Bolts shall be two-headed design to indicate when proper torque has been applied and require only a standard long handle wrench to be properly activated. 4. Access shall be required to only one side of the busway for tightening joint bolts. 5. Joint connection assemblies that rely on the joint cover to provide ground continuity are unacceptable. 2.4 PLUG-IN DEVICES A. Fusible Switches: NEMA KS 1, heavy duty; with R-type rejection fuse clips to accommodate specified fuses; hookstick-operated handle, lockable with two padlocks, and interlocked with cover in closed position. Interlocked to prevent plug-in device insertion into or removal from bus with switch in closed position. See Section 26 28 13 "Fuses" for fuses and fuse installation requirements. 1. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: a. Eaton. b. General Electric Company. c. Siemens Industry, Inc., Energy Management Division. d. Square D; by Schneider Electric. B. Molded-Case Circuit Breakers: UL 489; hookstick-operated handle, lockable with two padlocks, and interlocked with cover in closed position. Interlocked to prevent plug-in device insertion into or removal from bus with switch in closed position. 1. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: a. Eaton. b. General Electric Company. c. Siemens Industry, Inc., Energy Management Division. d. Square D; by Schneider Electric. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 INSTALLATION A. Coordinate layout and installation of enclosed bus assemblies and suspension system with other construction that penetrates ceilings or floors or is supported by them, including luminaires, HVAC equipment, fire-suppression system, and partition assemblies. B. Equipment Mounting: 1. Install enclosed bus assemblies on cast-in-place concrete equipment base(s). Comply with requirements for equipment bases and foundations specified in Section 03 30 00 "Cast-in-Place Concrete." 2. Coordinate size and location of concrete curbs around openings for vertical bus. Concrete, reinforcement, and formwork requirements are specified with concrete. C. Support bus assemblies independent of supports for other elements such as equipment enclosures at connections to panelboards and switchboards, pipes, conduits, ceilings, and ducts. 1. Design each fastener and support to carry load indicated by seismic requirements and to comply with seismic-restraint details according to Section 26 05 48.16 "Seismic Controls for Electrical Systems." 2. Design each fastener and support to carry 200 lb (90 kg) or 4 times the weight of bus assembly, whichever is greater. 3. Support bus assembly to prevent twisting from eccentric loading. 4. Support bus assembly with not less than 3/8-inch (10-mm) steel rods. Install side bracing to prevent swaying or movement of bus assembly. Modify supports after completion to eliminate strains and stresses on bus bars and housings. 5. Fasten supports securely to building structure according to Section 26 05 29 "Hangers and Supports for Electrical Systems." 6. Bolts and nuts that are loosened for any reason after tightening to manufacturer's recommended torque setting shall be discarded and replaced with new bolts and nuts. D. Install expansion fittings at locations where bus assemblies cross building expansion joints. Install at other locations so distance between expansion fittings does not exceed manufacturer's recommended distance between fittings. E. Construct rated firestop assemblies where bus assemblies penetrate fire-rated elements such as walls, floors, and ceilings. Seal around penetrations according to Section 07 84 13 "Penetration Firestopping." F. Install weatherseal fittings and flanges where bus assemblies penetrate exterior elements such as walls or roofs. Seal around openings to make weathertight. See Section 07 92 00 "Joint Sealants" for materials and application. G. Coordinate bus-assembly terminations to equipment enclosures to ensure proper phasing, connection, and closure. H. Tighten bus-assembly joints with torque wrench or similar tool recommended by bus-assembly manufacturer. Tighten joints again after bus assemblies have been energized for 30 days. I. Install bus-assembly, plug-in units. Support connecting conduit independent of plug-in unit. J. Comply with NECA 1. 3.2 CONNECTIONS A. Ground equipment according to Section 26 05 26 "Grounding and Bonding for Electrical Systems." B. Connect wiring according to Section 26 05 19 "Low-Voltage Electrical Power Conductors and Cables." C. Terminate to transformer enclosures with matching bus assemblies according to Section 26 22 00 "Low-Voltage Transformers." D. Terminate to switchgear enclosures with matching bus assemblies according to Section 26 23 00 "Low-Voltage Switchgear." E. Terminate to switchboard enclosures with matching bus assemblies according to Section 26 24 13 "Switchboards." F. Terminate to panelboard enclosures with matching bus assemblies according to Section 26 24 16 "Panelboards." G. Terminate to motor-control centers enclosures with matching bus assemblies according to Section 26 24 19 "Motor-Control Centers." 3.3 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Perform the following tests and inspections with the assistance of a factory-authorized service representative: 1. After installing equipment test, for compliance with requirements according to NETA ATS. 2. Visual and Mechanical Inspection: a. Compare equipment nameplate data with Drawings and Specifications. b. Inspect physical and mechanical condition. c. Inspect anchorage, alignment, and grounding. d. Verify correct connection according to single-line diagram. e. Inspect bolted electrical connections for high resistance using one or more of the following methods: 1) Use of low-resistance ohmmeter. 2) Verify tightness of accessible bolted electrical connections by calibrated torque-wrench method according to manufacturer's published data. 3) Perform thermographic survey. 3. Electrical Tests: a. Perform insulation resistance measurements through bolted connections and bus joints with low-resistance ohmmeter. b. Perform insulation resistance tests of each busway, phase to phase, and phase to ground. c. Perform a dielectric withstand voltage test on each busway, phase to ground with phases not under test grounded for one minute. d. Measure resistance of assembled busway sections on insulated busway and compare values with adjacent phases. e. Perform phasing test on each busway tie section energized by separate sources. f. Verify operation of busway space heaters. B. Infrared Scanning: After Substantial Completion, but not more than 60 days after Final Acceptance, perform an infrared scan of each switch. Remove all access panels so joints and connections are accessible to portable scanner. 1. Instrument: Use an infrared scanning device designed to measure temperature or to detect significant deviations from normal values. Provide calibration record for device. 2. Record of Infrared Scanning: Prepare a certified report that identifies switches checked and that describes scanning results. Include notation of deficiencies detected, remedial action taken, and observations after remedial action. 3. Follow-up Infrared Scanning: Perform an additional follow-up infrared scan of each switch 11 months after date of Substantial Completion. C. Test Labeling: On completion of satisfactory testing of each unit, attach a dated and signed "Satisfactory Test" label to tested component. D. Enclosed bus assemblies will be considered defective if they do not pass tests and inspections. E. Prepare test and inspection reports. 3.4 ADJUSTING A. Set field-adjustable, circuit-breaker trip ranges and overload relay trip settings as indicated. 3.5 CLEANING A. Vacuum dirt and debris; do not use compressed air to assist in cleaning. 3.6 PROTECTION A. Provide final protection to ensure that moisture does not enter bus assembly. END OF SECTION SECTION 26 26 00 POWER DISTRIBUTION UNITS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. This Section includes freestanding, prepackaged, power distribution units for transforming, conditioning, and distributing electrical power. 1.3 DEFINITIONS A. TVSS: Transient voltage surge suppression. B. UPS: Uninterrupted power supply. 1.4 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For power distribution units. Include system description, ratings, capacities, and performance characteristics. B. Shop Drawings: Include dimensioned plans, sections, and elevations. Detail equipment assemblies and indicate dimensions, weights, loads, required clearances, method of field assembly, components, and location and size of each field connection. 1. Wiring Diagrams: Power, signal, and control wiring. 1.5 INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS A. Qualification Data: For manufacturer. B. Product Certificates: For each type of power distribution unit, signed by product manufacturer. C. Manufacturer Seismic Qualification Certification: Submit certification that power distribution units, accessories, and components will withstand seismic forces defined in Section 26 05 48.16 "Seismic Controls for Electrical Systems." Include the following: 1. Basis for Certification: Indicate whether withstand certification is based on actual test of assembled components or on calculation. a. The term "withstand" means "the unit will remain in place without separation of any parts from the device when subjected to the seismic forces specified." b. The term "withstand" means "the unit will remain in place without separation of any parts from the device when subjected to the seismic forces specified and the unit will be fully operational after the seismic event." 2. Dimensioned Outline Drawings of Equipment Unit: Identify center of gravity and locate and describe mounting and anchorage provisions. 3. Detailed description of equipment anchorage devices on which the certification is based and their installation requirements. D. Source quality-control test reports. 1. For each factory test of power distribution units. E. Field quality-control test reports. 1.6 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Operation and Maintenance Data: For power distribution units to include in emergency, operation, and maintenance manuals. 1.7 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Manufacturer Qualifications: A qualified manufacturer. Maintain a service center capable of providing training, parts, and emergency on-site repairs in less than eight hours' maximum response time. B. Testing Agency Qualifications: An independent agency, with the experience and capability to conduct the testing indicated, that is a member company of the InterNational Electrical Testing Association or is a nationally recognized testing laboratory (NRTL) as defined by OSHA in 29 CFR 1910.7, and that is acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction. 1. Testing Agency's Field Supervisor: Person currently certified by the InterNational Electrical Testing Association or the National Institute for Certification in Engineering Technologies to supervise on-site testing specified in Part 3. C. Source Limitations: Obtain power distribution unit and associated components specified in this Section from a single manufacturer with responsibility for entire power distribution unit installation. D. Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, Article 100, by a testing agency acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction, and marked for intended use. E. Comply with NFPA 70. 1.8 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Deliver equipment in fully enclosed vehicles after specified environmental conditions have been permanently established in spaces where equipment is to be placed. B. Store equipment in spaces with environments controlled within manufacturer's ambient temperature and humidity tolerances for non-operating equipment. 1.9 COORDINATION A. Coordinate size and location of concrete bases with actual power distribution unit provided. Cast anchor-bolt inserts into bases. Concrete, reinforcement, and formwork requirements are specified with concrete. B. Coordinate layout and installation of power distribution units with access flooring for proper support and seismic restraint of units. C. Coordinate layout and installation of power distribution units with Owner's equipment. 1. Meet jointly with electronic equipment representatives and Owner's representatives to exchange information and agree on details of equipment arrangements and installation interfaces. 2. Record agreements reached in meetings and distribute record to other participants. 3. Adjust arrangements and locations of power distribution units to accommodate and optimize arrangement and space requirements of equipment. 1.10 PROJECT CONDITIONS A. Environmental Conditions: Units shall be capable of operating continuously in the following environmental conditions without mechanical or electrical damage or degradation of operating capability. 1. Storage Temperature Range: Minus 67 to plus 185 deg F (Minus 55 to plus 85 deg C). 2. Operating Temperature Range: 32 to 104 deg F (0 to 40 deg C). 3. Relative Humidity Range: 0 to 95 percent, noncondensing. 4. Altitude: Sea level to 3600 feet (1100 m) above sea level. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 MANUFACTURERS A. Available Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, manufacturers offering products that may be incorporated into the Work include, but are not limited to, the following: B. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Controlled Power Company. 2. Liebert Corporation; a division of Emerson. 3. Myers Power Products, Inc. 4. Power Distribution, Inc. 5. Square D; Schneider Electric. 6. United Power Corporation. 7. 2.2 MANUFACTURED UNITS A. Description: Integrated and coordinated assembly of power-line-conditioning and distribution components packaged in a single cabinet or modular assembly of cabinets. Include the following components: 1. Input-power, circuit-breaker section. 2. Isolation transformer. 3. TVSS system. 4. Output panelboard(s). 5. Alarm, monitoring, and control system. B. Provide units that are constructed to withstand seismic forces specified in Section 26 05 48.16 "Seismic Controls for Electrical Systems." C. Unit Capacity Rating: Unit shall carry indicated rms kilovolt-ampere load continuously without exceeding rated insulation temperature for the following input voltage and load current: 1. Input Voltage: Within rated input-voltage tolerance band of unit. 2. Load Current: Minimum of 3.0 crest factor and 85 percent total harmonic distortion. 2.3 INPUT-POWER, CIRCUIT-BREAKER SECTION A. Description: 3-pole, shunt-tripped, thermal-magnetic-type circuit breaker, rated for indicated interrupting capacity and 125 percent of input current of unit at 100 percent rated load. 1. Dual-Input Units: a. Two input circuit breakers arranged to provide transfer between two input-voltage sources. b. Controls and interfaces to allow both open-and closed-transition transfer between two input-voltage sources. c. Use a 120-V permissive signal from both upstream voltage sources to indicate acceptable conditions for closed-transition transfer. d. Open second circuit breaker automatically after closed-transition transfer is competed. 2.4 ISOLATION TRANSFORMER SECTION A. Description: Dry-type, electrostatically shielded, three-phase, common-core, convection-air-cooled isolation transformer. 1. Comply with UL 1561 including requirements for nonsinusoidal load-current.handling capability defined by designated K-factor. 2. Cores: Grain-oriented, non-aging silicon steel, one leg per phase. 3. Coil Material and Insulation: Copper windings with a 220 deg C insulation class. 4. Temperature Rise: Designed for 150 deg C rise above 40 deg C ambient. 5. Output Impedance: 3.5 plus or minus 0.5 percent. 6. Regulation: 2 to 4 percent maximum, at full-resistive load; 5 percent maximum, at rated nonlinear load. 7. Taps: 6 full-capacity compensation taps at 2.5 percent increments; 2 above and 4 below nominal voltage. 8. Full-Load Efficiency: Minimum 96 percent at rated load. 9. Magnetic-Field Strength External to Transformer Enclosure: Less than 0.1 gauss at 450 mm. 10. Audible Noise: Comply with NEMA ST 20. 11. Electrostatic Shielding: Independently shield each winding with a double-copper, electrostatic shield arranged to minimize interwinding capacitance. a. Coil leads and terminal trips shall be arranged to minimize capacitive coupling between input and output connections. b. Shield Terminal: Separate, and marked "Shield" for grounding connection. c. Capacitance: Limit capacitance between primary and secondary windings to a maximum of 33 picofarads over a frequency range of 20 Hz to 1 MHz. d. Common-Mode Noise Attenuation: 120 dB minimum, 0.5 to 1.5 kHz; minus 65 dB minimum, 1.5 to 100 kHz. e. Normal-Mode Noise Attenuation: Minus 52 dB minimum, 1.5 to 10 kHz. 12. Neutral Rating: 1.732 times the system full-load ampere rating. 2.5 TVSS SYSTEM A. Description: Integrated TVSS system complying with Section 26 43 13 "Surge Protection for Low-Voltage Electrical Power Circuits," to protect unit panelboard, and having the following features: 1. Disconnect Device: Manual, three-pole, fused disconnect switch to de-energize TVSS system while permitting power distribution units to continue operation. Fuses are rated at 200-kA interrupting capacity. 2. Nonlinear Loading: System shall accommodate rated-load current with a minimum 3.0 crest factor and 85 percent total harmonic distortion. 2.6 OUTPUT PANELBOARDS A. Description: Panelboards complying with Section 26 24 16 "Panelboards" except for mounting provisions. Mount in front of power distribution units behind flush doors. Include the following features: 1. Construction: 42 pole, 240 V, 3 phase; capable of accepting branch circuit breakers rated to 100 A. 2. Panelboard Rating: 225 A, with main circuit breaker. 3. Panelboard Phase, Neutral and Ground Buses: Copper, with neutral bus at least 1.732 times the nominal phase bus rating. 4. Isolated Ground Bus: Copper, adequate for branch-circuit equipment ground conductors; insulated from supports. 5. Branch Circuit Breakers: Bolt on. 6. Cable Racks: Removable and arranged for supporting and routing cables for panelboard entrance. 7. Access Panels: Arranged so additional branch-circuit wiring can be installed and connected in the future. 2.7 POWER DISTRIBUTION UNIT CONTROLS A. Include the following control features: 1. Over-under alarm shutdown with automatic unit disconnection for the following alarm conditions: a. High temperature. b. High and low input or output voltage. c. Phase loss. d. Ground fault. e. Reverse phase rotation. 2. Ground-fault protection with automatic system shutdown. 3. Alarm Contacts: Electrically isolated, Form C (one normally open and one normally closed), summary alarm; contact set shall change state if any monitored function goes into alarm mode. 4. Remote Power-Off Control: Control circuit with connection to shunt trip of power distribution unit main power circuit breaker and terminals for connection to one or more remote power-off, push-button stations. 5. Input and output breakers shall have open / close / trip status monitoring as well as voltage, current, and power monitoring. 6. MODBUS TCP/IP, (1) network drop per PDU. Refer to QTS EPMS Points for full list of monitoring points. 2.8 MONITORING, STATUS, AND ALARM ANNUNCIATION A. Description: Microprocessor-based monitoring, status, and alarm annunciation panel mounted flush in front of power distribution unit to provide status display and failure-indicating interface for the following: 1. Power Monitoring: a. Input Voltage: Line to line, rms. b. Output Voltage: Line to line, rms. c. Output Voltage: Line to neutral, rms. d. Output current. 2. Status Indication: Unit on. 3. Alarm Annunciation: a. High temperature. b. High and low input voltage. c. High and low output voltage. d. Phase loss. e. Ground fault. f. Frequency. g. Phase rotation. h. TVSS module failure. 4. Audible Alarm and Silencing Switch: Alarm sounds when alarm indication occurs. Silencing switch shall silence audible alarm but leave visual indication active until failure or other alarm conditions are corrected. 2.9 SOUND LEVEL A. General: Fully assembled products comply with minimum sound-level requirements in NEMA ST 20 for transformers of corresponding ratings when factory tested according to IEEE C57.12.91. B. General: Fully assembled products have a minimum of 3 dB less than the maximum sound levels prescribed for transformers of corresponding ratings when factory tested according to IEEE C57.12.91. 2.10 FINISHES A. Manufacturer's standard finish over corrosion-resistant pretreatment and primer. 2.11 SOURCE QUALITY CONTROL A. Factory Tests: Design and routine tests shall comply with referenced standards. B. Factory Sound-Level Tests: Conduct sound-level tests on equipment. Comply with IEEE C57.12.91 and NEMA ST 20. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 INSTALLATION A. Arrange power distribution units to provide adequate access to equipment and circulation of cooling air. B. Anchor or restrain floor-mounting power distribution units according to manufacturer's written instructions, seismic codes applicable to Project, and requirements in Section 26 05 48.16 "Seismic Controls for Electrical Systems." C. Identify equipment and install warning signs according to Section 26 05 53 "Identification for Electrical Systems." 3.2 CONNECTIONS A. Ground equipment according to Section 26 05 26 "Grounding and Bonding for Electrical Systems." 1. Separately Derived Systems: Make grounding connections to grounding electrodes as indicated; comply with NFPA 70. B. Connect wiring according to Section 26 05 19 "Low-Voltage Electrical Power Conductors and Cables." 3.3 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Testing Agency: Owner will engage a qualified testing agency to perform tests and inspections and prepare test reports. B. Manufacturer's Field Service: Engage a factory-authorized service representative to inspect, test, and adjust components, assemblies, and equipment installations, including connections. Report results in writing. C. Perform tests and inspections and prepare test reports. 1. Manufacturer's Field Service: Engage a factory-authorized service representative to inspect components, assemblies, and equipment installations, including connections, and to assist in testing. D. Tests and Inspections: 1. Perform each visual and mechanical inspection and electrical test stated in NETA Acceptance Testing Specification for circuit breakers, molded case; and for transformers, dry type, air cooled, low voltage, small. Certify compliance with test parameters. 2. Perform functional tests of power distribution units throughout their operating ranges. Test each monitoring, status, and alarm function. E. Remove malfunctioning units, replace with new units, and retest as specified above. F. Infrared Scanning: Two months after Substantial Completion, perform an infrared scan of conductor and bus connections. 1. Use an infrared-scanning device designed to measure temperature or detect significant deviations from normal values. Provide documentation of device calibration. 2. Perform 2 follow-up infrared scans of transformers, one at 4 months and the other at 11 months after Substantial Completion. 3. Prepare a certified report identifying connections checked and describing results of scanning. Include notation of deficiencies detected, remedial action taken, and scanning observations after remedial action. G. Test Labeling: On completion of satisfactory testing of each unit, attach a dated and signed "Satisfactory Test" label to tested component. 3.4 STARTUP SERVICE A. Engage a factory-authorized service representative to perform startup service. 1. Verify that power distribution units are installed and connected according to the Contract Documents. 2. Verify that electrical wiring installation complies with manufacturer's submittal and with written installation requirements in other electrical Sections. 3. Complete installation and startup checks according to manufacturer's written instructions. 3.5 ADJUSTING A. Set field-adjustable switches and circuit-breaker trip ranges as indicated. B. Adjust power distribution units to provide optimum voltage to equipment served throughout normal operating cycle of loads served. Record input and output voltages and adjustment settings, and incorporate into test results. 3.6 CLEANING A. Vacuum dirt and debris; do not use compressed air to assist in cleaning. 3.7 DEMONSTRATION A. Engage a factory-authorized service representative to train Owner's maintenance personnel to adjust, operate, and maintain power distribution units. Refer to Section 01 79 00 "Demonstration and Training." END OF SECTION SECTION 26 27 26 WIRING DEVICES PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. B. Refer to the following sections for additional device requirements: 1. 260923 LIGHTING CONTROL DEVICES 1.2 SUMMARY A. Section Includes: 1. Standard-grade receptacles, 125 V, 20 A. 2. USB receptacles. 3. GFCI receptacles, 125 V, 20 A. 4. Hospital-grade receptacles, 125 V, 20 A. 5. Twist-locking receptacles. 6. Pendant cord-connector devices. 7. Cord and plug sets. 8. Toggle switches, 120/277 V, 20 A. 9. Decorator-style devices, 20 A. 10. Residential devices. 11. Wall-box dimmers. 12. Wall plates. 13. Floor service fittings. 14. Poke-through assemblies. 1.3 DEFINITIONS A. AFCI: Arc-fault circuit interrupter. B. BAS: Building automation system. C. EMI: Electromagnetic interference. D. GFCI: Ground-fault circuit interrupter. E. Pigtail: Short lead used to connect a device to a branch-circuit conductor. F. RFI: Radio-frequency interference. G. SPD: Surge protective device. 1.4 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For each type of product. 1.5 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Operation and Maintenance Data: For wiring devices to include in all manufacturers' packing-label warnings and instruction manuals that include labeling conditions. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 GENERAL WIRING-DEVICE REQUIREMENTS A. Wiring Devices, Components, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and use. B. Comply with NFPA 70. C. RoHS compliant. D. Comply with NEMA WD 1. E. Devices that are manufactured for use with modular plug-in connectors may be substituted under the following conditions: 1. Connectors shall comply with UL 2459 and shall be made with stranded building wire. 2. Devices shall comply with requirements in this Section. F. Devices for Owner-Furnished Equipment: 1. Receptacles: Match plug configurations. 2. Cord and Plug Sets: Match equipment requirements. G. Device Color: 1. Wiring Devices Connected to Normal Power System: White, or as selected by Architect unless otherwise indicated or required by NFPA 70 or device listing. 2. Wiring Devices Connected to Essential Electrical System: Red. 3. Isolated-Ground Receptacles: Orange. H. Wall Plate Color: For thermoplastic or plastic covers, match device color. 2.2 MANUFACTURERS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Cooper Wiring Devices; Division of Cooper Industries, Inc. (Cooper). 2. Hubbell Incorporated; Wiring Device-Kellems (Hubbell). 3. Leviton Mfg. Company Inc. (Leviton). 4. Pass & Seymour/Legrand (Pass & Seymour). B. Source Limitations: Obtain each type of wiring device and associated wall plate from single source from single manufacturer. 2.3 STANDARD COMMERCIAL-GRADE RECEPTACLES, 125 V, 20 A A. Duplex Receptacles, 125 V, 20 A: 1. Description: Two pole, three wire, and self-grounding. 2. Configuration: NEMA WD 6, Configuration 5-20R. 3. Standards: Comply with UL 498 and FS W-C-596. B. Isolated-Ground Duplex Receptacles, 125 V, 20 A: 1. Description: Straight blade; equipment grounding contacts shall be connected only to green grounding screw terminal of the device and with inherent electrical isolation from mounting strap. Isolation shall be integral to receptacle construction and not dependent on removable parts. Two pole, three wire, and self-grounding. 2. Configuration: NEMA WD 6, Configuration 5-20R. 3. Standards: Comply with UL 498 and FS W-C-596. C. Tamper-Resistant Duplex Receptacles, 125 V, 20 A: 1. Description: Two pole, three wire, and self-grounding. Integral shutters that operate only when a plug is inserted in the receptacle. 2. Configuration: NEMA WD 6, Configuration 5-20R. 3. Standards: Comply with UL 498 and FS W-C-596. 4. Marking: Listed and labeled as complying with NFPA 70, "Tamper-Resistant Receptacles" Article. D. Weather-Resistant Duplex Receptacle, 125 V, 20 A 1. Description: Two pole, three wire, and self-grounding. Integral shutters that operate only when a plug is inserted in the receptacle. Square face. 2. Configuration: NEMA WD 6, Configuration 5-20R. 3. Standards: Comply with UL 498. 4. Marking: Listed and labeled as complying with NFPA 70, "Receptacles in Damp or Wet Locations" Article. E. Tamper-and Weather-Resistant Duplex Receptacles, 125 V, 20 A 1. Description: Two pole, three wire, and self-grounding. Integral shutters that operate only when a plug is inserted in the receptacle. Square face. 2. Configuration: NEMA WD 6, Configuration 5-20R. 3. Standards: Comply with UL 498. 4. Marking: Listed and labeled as complying with NFPA 70, "Tamper-Resistant Receptacles" and "Receptacles in Damp or Wet Locations" articles. 2.4 USB RECEPTACLES A. USB Charging Receptacles 1. Description: Single-piece, rivetless, nickel-plated, all-brass grounding system. Nickel-plated, brass mounting strap. 2. USB Receptacles: Dual, Combo USB Type A/Type C, 5 V dc, and 2.1 A per receptacle (minimum). 3. Standards: Comply with UL 1310 and USB 3.0 devices. 2.5 GFCI RECEPTACLES, 125 V, 20 A A. Duplex GFCI Receptacles, 125 V, 20 A 1. Description: Integral GFCI with "Test" and "Reset" buttons and LED indicator light. Two pole, three wire, and self-grounding. 2. Configuration: NEMA WD 6, Configuration 5-20R. 3. Type: Feed through. 4. Standards: Comply with UL 498, UL 943 Class A, and FS W-C-596. 2.6 HOSPITAL-GRADE RECEPTACLES, 125 V, 20 A A. Hospital-Grade, Duplex Receptacles, 125 V, 20 A 1. Description: Single-piece, rivetless, nickel-plated, all-brass grounding system. Nickel-plated, brass mounting strap. Two pole, three wire, and self-grounding. 2. Configuration: NEMA WD 6, Configuration 5-20R. 3. Standards: Comply with UL 498 Supplement sd and FS W-C-596. 4. Marking: Listed and labeled as complying with NFPA 70, "Health Care Facilities" Article. B. Hospital-Grade, Isolated-Ground, Duplex Receptacles, 125 V, 20 A 1. Description: Straight blade; equipment grounding contacts shall be connected only to green grounding screw terminal of the device and with inherent electrical isolation from mounting strap. Isolation shall be integral to receptacle construction and not dependent on removable parts. Two pole, three wire, and self-grounding. 2. Configuration: NEMA WD 6, Configuration 5-20R. 3. Standards: Comply with UL 498 Supplement sd and FS W-C-596. 4. Marking: Listed and labeled as complying with NFPA 70, "Health Care Facilities" Article. C. Hospital-Grade, Tamper-Resistant, Duplex Receptacles, 125 V, 20 A 1. Description: Two pole, three wire, and self-grounding. Integral shutters that operate only when a plug is inserted in the receptacle. 2. Configuration: NEMA WD 6, Configuration 5-20R. 3. Standards: Comply with NEMA WD 1, UL 498 Supplement sd, and FS W-C-596. 4. Marking: Listed and labeled as complying with NFPA 70, "Health Care Facilities" Article. D. Hospital-Grade, Duplex GFCI Receptacles, 125 V, 20 A 1. Description: Integral GFCI with "Test" and "Reset" buttons and LED indicator light. Two pole, three wire, and self-grounding. Single-piece, rivetless, nickel-plated, all-brass grounding system. 2. Configuration: NEMA WD 6, Configuration 5-20R. 3. Type: Feed through. 4. Standards: Comply with UL 498 supplement sd, UL 943 Class A, and FS W-C.596. 5. Marking: Listed and labeled as complying with NFPA 70, "Health Care Facilities" Article. 2.7 TWIST-LOCKING RECEPTACLES A. Twist-Lock, Single Receptacles, 120 V, 20 A 1. Configuration: NEMA WD 6, Configuration L5-20R. 2. Standards: Comply with UL 498. B. Twist-Lock, Single Receptacles, 250 V, 20 A 1. Configuration: NEMA WD 6, Configuration L6-20R. 2. Standards: Comply with UL 498. C. Twist-Lock, Single Receptacles, 250 V, 30 A 1. Configuration: NEMA WD 6, Configuration L6-30R. 2. Standards: Comply with UL 498. D. Twist-Lock, Isolated-Ground, Single Receptacles, 125 V, 20 A 1. Grounding: Equipment grounding contacts shall be connected only to green grounding screw terminal of the device and with inherent electrical isolation from mounting strap. Isolation shall be integral to receptacle construction and not dependent on removable parts. 2. Configuration: NEMA WD 6, Configuration L5-20R. 3. Standards: Comply with UL 498. 2.8 PENDANT CORD-CONNECTOR DEVICES A. Description: Matching, locking-type plug and receptacle body connector, heavy-duty grade. B. Configuration: NEMA WD 6, Configurations L5-20P and L5-20R, or as required (see Drawings for variations). C. Body: Nylon, with screw-open, cable-gripping jaws and provision for attaching external cable grip. D. External Cable Grip: Woven wire-mesh type made of high-strength, galvanized-steel wire strand, matched to cable diameter, and with attachment provision designed for corresponding connector. E. Standards: Comply with FS W-C-596. 2.9 CORD AND PLUG SETS A. Match voltage and current ratings and number of conductors to requirements of equipment being connected. B. Cord: Rubber-insulated, stranded-copper conductors, with Type SOW-A jacket; with green-insulated grounding conductor and ampacity of at least 130 percent of the equipment rating. C. Plug: Nylon body and integral cable-clamping jaws. Match cord and receptacle type for connection. 2.10 TOGGLE SWITCHES, 120/277 V, 20 A A. Single-Pole Switches, 120/277 V, 20 A 1. Standards: Comply with UL 20 and FS W-S-896. B. Three-Way Switches, 120/277 V, 20 A 1. Comply with UL 20 and FS W-S-896. C. Key-Operated, Single-Pole Switches, 120/277 V, 20 A 1. Description: Factory-supplied key in lieu of switch handle. 2. Standards: Comply with UL 20 and FS W-S-896. 2.11 DECORATOR-STYLE COMMERCIAL-GRADE DEVICES, 20 A A. Decorator Duplex Receptacles, 125 V, 20 A 1. Description: Two pole, three wire, and self-grounding. Square face. 2. Configuration: NEMA WD 6, Configuration 5-20R. 3. Standards: Comply with UL 498. B. Decorator Tamper-Resistant Duplex Receptacles, 125 V, 20 A 1. Description: Two pole, three wire, and self-grounding. Integral shutters that operate only when a plug is inserted in the receptacle. Square face. 2. Configuration: NEMA WD 6, Configuration 5-20R. 3. Standards: Comply with UL 498. 4. Marking: Listed and labeled as complying with NFPA 70, "Tamper-Resistant Receptacles" Article. C. Decorator Single-Pole Switches, 120/277 V, 20 A 1. Comply with UL 20. 2.12 RESIDENTIAL DEVICES A. Residential-Grade, Tamper-Resistant, GFCI Receptacles, 125 V, 15 A 1. Configuration: NEMA WD 6, Configuration 5-15R. 2. Feed-through connectors. 3. Standards: Comply with UL 943 and UL 1699. B. Residential-Grade, Tamper-Resistant, AFCI Receptacles, 125 V, 15 A 1. Configuration: NEMA WD 6, Configuration 5-15R. 2. Feed-through connectors. 3. Standards: Comply with UL 943 and UL 1699. C. Residential-Grade, Tamper-Resistant Receptacles, 125 V, 15 A 1. Configuration: NEMA WD 6, Configuration 5-15R. 2. Feed-through connectors. 3. Standards: Comply with UL 498. 2.13 DIMMERS A. Wall-Box Dimmers: 1. Description: Modular, full-wave, solid-state dimmer switch with integral, quiet on-off switches, with audible frequency and EMI/RFI suppression filters. 2. Control: Continuously adjustable slider; with single-pole or three-way switching. 3. Standards: Comply with UL 1472. 4. Incandescent Lamp Dimmers: 120 V; control shall follow square-law dimming curve. On-off switch positions shall bypass dimmer module. a. 600 W; dimmers shall require no derating when ganged with other devices. b. Other Wattage ratings as required. 5. Fluorescent Lamp Dimmer Switches: Modular; compatible with dimmer ballasts; trim potentiometer to adjust low-end dimming; dimmer-ballast combination capable of consistent dimming with low end not greater than 20 percent of full brightness. 6. LED Lamp Dimmer Switches: Modular; compatible with LED lamps; trim potentiometer to adjust low-end dimming; capable of consistent dimming with low end not greater than 20 percent of full brightness. 2.14 WALL PLATES A. Single Source: Obtain wall plates from same manufacturer of wiring devices. B. Single and combination types shall match corresponding wiring devices. 1. Plate-Securing Screws: Metal with head color to match plate finish. 2. Material for Finished Spaces: Smooth, high-impact thermoplastic. 3. Material for Unfinished Spaces: Galvanized steel. C. Wet-Location, Weatherproof Cover Plates: NEMA 250, complying with Type 3R, weather-resistant in-use, die-cast aluminum with lockable cover. 2.15 FLOOR SERVICE FITTINGS A. Flush-Type Floor Service Fittings: 1. Description: Type: Modular, flush-type, dual-service units suitable for wiring method used, with cover flush with finished floor. 2. Compartments: Barrier separates power from voice and data communication cabling. 3. Service Plate and Cover: Rectangular, solid brass with satin finish. 4. Power Receptacle: NEMA WD 6 Configuration 5-20R, gray finish, unless otherwise indicated. 5. Data Communication Outlet: Blank cover with bushed cable opening. 2.16 POKE-THROUGH ASSEMBLIES A. Description: Factory-fabricated and -wired assembly of below-floor junction box with multichanneled, through-floor raceway/firestop unit and detachable matching floor service-outlet assembly. B. Standards: Comply with scrub water exclusion requirements in UL 514. C. Service-Outlet Assembly: Flush type with two simplex receptacles and space for two RJ-45 jacks D. Size: Selected to fit nominal 4-inch (100-mm) cored holes in floor and matched to floor thickness. E. Fire Rating: Unit is listed and labeled for fire rating of floor-ceiling assembly. F. Closure Plug: Arranged to close unused 4-inch (100-mm) cored openings and reestablish fire PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 INSTALLATION A. Comply with NECA 1, including mounting heights listed in that standard, unless otherwise indicated. B. Coordination with Other Trades: 1. Protect installed devices and their boxes. Do not place wall finish materials over device boxes, and do not cut holes for boxes with routers that are guided by riding against outside of boxes. 2. Keep outlet boxes free of plaster, drywall joint compound, mortar, cement, concrete, dust, paint, and other material that may contaminate the raceway system, conductors, and cables. 3. Install device boxes in brick or block walls so that the cover plate does not cross a joint unless the joint is troweled flush with the face of the wall. 4. Install wiring devices after all wall preparation, including painting, is complete. C. Conductors: 1. Do not strip insulation from conductors until right before they are spliced or terminated on devices. 2. Strip insulation evenly around the conductor using tools designed for the purpose. Avoid scoring or nicking of solid wire or cutting strands from stranded wire. 3. The length of free conductors at outlets for devices shall comply with NFPA 70, Article 300, without pigtails. 4. Existing Conductors: a. Cut back and pigtail, or replace all damaged conductors. b. Straighten conductors that remain and remove corrosion and foreign matter. c. Pigtailing existing conductors is permitted, provided the outlet box is large enough. D. Device Installation: 1. Replace devices that have been in temporary use during construction and that were installed before building finishing operations were complete. 2. Keep each wiring device in its package or otherwise protected until it is time to connect conductors. 3. Do not remove surface protection, such as plastic film and smudge covers, until the last possible moment. 4. Connect devices to branch circuits using pigtails that are not less than 6 inches (152 mm) in length. 5. When there is a choice, use side wiring with binding-head screw terminals. Wrap solid conductor tightly clockwise, two-thirds to three-fourths of the way around terminal screw. 6. Use a torque screwdriver when a torque is recommended or required by manufacturer. 7. When conductors larger than No. 12 AWG are installed on 15-or 20-A circuits, splice No. 12 AWG pigtails for device connections. 8. Tighten unused terminal screws on the device. 9. When mounting into metal boxes, remove the fiber or plastic washers used to hold device-mounting screws in yokes, allowing metal-to-metal contact. E. Receptacle Orientation: 1. Install ground pin of vertically mounted receptacles up, and on horizontally mounted receptacles to the right. F. Device Plates: Do not use oversized or extra-deep plates. Repair wall finishes and remount outlet boxes when standard device plates do not fit flush or do not cover rough wall opening. G. Dimmers: 1. Install dimmers within terms of their listing. 2. Verify that dimmers used for fan-speed control are listed for that application. 3. Install unshared neutral conductors on line and load side of dimmers according to manufacturers' device, listing conditions in the written instructions. H. Arrangement of Devices: Unless otherwise indicated, mount flush, with long dimension vertical and with grounding terminal of receptacles on top. Group adjacent switches under single, multi-gang wall plates. I. Adjust locations of floor service outlets and service poles to suit arrangement of partitions and furnishings. 3.2 IDENTIFICATION A. Comply with Section 26 05 53 "Identification for Electrical Systems." B. Identify each receptacle with panelboard identification and circuit number. Use self-adhesive transfer printing tape with black lettering on face of plate, and durable wire markers or tags inside outlet boxes. C. Essential Electrical System: Mark receptacles supplied from the essential electrical system to allow easy identification using a self-adhesive label. 3.3 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Perform the following tests and inspections: 1. In healthcare facilities, prepare reports that comply with NFPA 99. 2. Test Instruments: Use instruments that comply with UL 1436. 3. Test Instrument for Receptacles: Digital wiring analyzer with digital readout or illuminated digital-display indicators of measurement. B. Tests for Receptacles: 1. Line Voltage: Acceptable range is 105 to 132 V. 2. Percent Voltage Drop under 15-A Load: A value of 6 percent or higher is unacceptable. 3. Ground Impedance: Values of up to 2 ohms are acceptable. 4. GFCI Trip: Test for tripping values specified in UL 1436 and UL 943. 5. Using the test plug, verify that the device and its outlet box are securely mounted. 6. Tests shall be diagnostic, indicating damaged conductors, high resistance at the circuit breaker, poor connections, inadequate fault-current path, defective devices, or similar problems. Correct circuit conditions, remove malfunctioning units and replace with new ones, and retest as specified above. C. Test straight-blade convenience outlets in patient-care areas for the retention force of the grounding blade according to NFPA 99. Retention force shall be not less than 4 oz. (115 g). D. Wiring device will be considered defective if it does not pass tests and inspections. END OF SECTION SECTION 26 28 13 FUSES PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Section Includes: 1. Cartridge fuses rated 600 V ac and less for use in the following: a. Control circuits. b. Motor-control centers. c. Panelboards. d. Switchboards. e. Enclosed controllers. f. Enclosed switches. 2. Spare-fuse cabinets. 1.3 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For each type of product. Include construction details, material descriptions, dimensions of individual components and profiles, and finishes for spare-fuse cabinets. Include the following for each fuse type indicated: 1. Dimensions and manufacturer's technical data on features, performance, electrical characteristics, and ratings. 1.4 MAINTENANCE MATERIAL SUBMITTALS A. Furnish extra materials that match products installed and that are packaged with protective covering for storage and identified with labels describing contents. 1. Fuses: Equal to 10 percent of quantity installed for each size and type, but no fewer than three of each size and type. 2.1 MANUFACTURERS PART 2 -PRODUCTS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, available manufacturers offering products that may be incorporated into the Work include, but are not limited to the following: 1. Bussmann, an Eaton business. 2. Littelfuse, Inc. B. Source Limitations: Obtain fuses, for use within a specific product or circuit, from single source from single manufacturer. 2.2 CARTRIDGE FUSES A. Characteristics: NEMA FU 1, current-limiting, nonrenewable cartridge fuses with voltage ratings consistent with circuit voltages. 1. Type RK-1: 250 600-V, zero-to 600-A rating, 200 kAIC, time delay. 2. Type RK-5: 250 600-V, zero-to 600-A rating, 200 kAIC, time delay. 3. Type L: 600-V, 601-to 6000-A rating, 200 kAIC, time delay. B. Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. C. Comply with NEMA FU 1 for cartridge fuses. D. Comply with NFPA 70. E. Coordinate fuse ratings with utilization equipment nameplate limitations of maximum fuse size and with system short-circuit current levels. 2.3 SPARE-FUSE CABINET A. Characteristics: Wall-mounted steel unit with full-length, recessed piano-hinged door and key-coded cam lock and pull. 1. Size: Adequate for storage of spare fuses specified with 15 percent spare capacity minimum. 2. Finish: Gray, baked enamel. 3. Identification: "SPARE FUSES" in 1-1/2-inch-(38-mm-) high letters on exterior of door. 4. Fuse Pullers: For each size of fuse, where applicable and available, from fuse manufacturer. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 EXAMINATION A. Examine fuses before installation. Reject fuses that are moisture damaged or physically damaged. B. Examine holders to receive fuses for compliance with installation tolerances and other conditions affecting performance, such as rejection features. C. Examine utilization equipment nameplates and installation instructions. Install fuses of sizes and with characteristics appropriate for each piece of equipment. D. Evaluate ambient temperatures to determine if fuse rating adjustment factors must be applied to fuse ratings. E. Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected. 3.2 FUSE APPLICATIONS A. Cartridge Fuses: 1. Service Entrance: Class L, time delay Class RK1, time delay. 2. Feeders: Class L, time delay Class RK1, time delay Class RK5, time delay. 3. Motor Branch Circuits: Class RK1, time delay. 4. Large Motor Branch (601-4000 A): Class L, time delay. 5. Other Branch Circuits: Class RK5, time delay. 3.3 INSTALLATION A. Install fuses in fusible devices. Arrange fuses so rating information is readable without removing fuse. B. Install spare-fuse cabinet(s) in location shown on the Drawings or as indicated in the field by Construction Manager. 3.4 IDENTIFICATION A. Install labels complying with requirements for identification specified in Section 26 05 53 "Identification for Electrical Systems" and indicating fuse replacement information inside of door of each fused switch and adjacent to each fuse block, socket, and holder. END OF SECTION SECTION 26 28 16 ENCLOSED SWITCHES AND CIRCUIT BREAKERS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and other Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Section Includes: 1. Fusible switches. 2. Nonfusible switches. 3. Receptacle switches. 4. Shunt trip switches. 5. Molded-case circuit breakers (MCCBs). 6. Molded-case switches. 7. Enclosures. 1.3 DEFINITIONS A. NC: Normally closed. B. NO: Normally open. C. SPDT: Single pole, double throw. 1.4 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For each type of enclosed switch, circuit breaker, accessory, and component indicated. Include nameplate ratings, dimensioned elevations, sections, weights, and manufacturers' technical data on features, performance, electrical characteristics, ratings, accessories, and finishes. 1. Enclosure types and details for types other than NEMA 250, Type 1. 2. Current and voltage ratings. 3. Short-circuit current ratings (interrupting and withstand, as appropriate). 4. Include evidence of a nationally recognized testing laboratory (NRTL) listing for series rating of installed devices. 5. Detail features, characteristics, ratings, and factory settings of individual overcurrent protective devices, accessories, and auxiliary components. 1.5 INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS A. Seismic Qualification Data: Certificates, for enclosed switches and circuit breakers, accessories, and components, from manufacturer. 1. Basis for Certification: Indicate whether withstand certification is based on actual test of assembled components or on calculation. 2. Dimensioned Outline Drawings of Equipment Unit: Identify center of gravity and locate and describe mounting and anchorage provisions. 3. Detailed description of equipment anchorage devices on which the certification is based and their installation requirements. B. Field quality-control reports. 1.6 WARRANTY A. Manufacturer's Warranty: Manufacturer and Installer agree to repair or replace components that fail in materials or workmanship within specified warranty period. 1. Warranty Period: One year(s) from date of Substantial Completion. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. Seismic Performance: Enclosed switches and circuit breakers shall withstand the effects of earthquake motions determined according to ASCE/SEI 7. 1. The term "withstand" means "the unit will remain in place without separation of any parts from the device when subjected to the seismic forces specified." 2.2 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS A. Source Limitations: Obtain enclosed switches and circuit breakers, overcurrent protective devices, components, and accessories, within same product category, from single manufacturer. B. Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by an NRTL, and marked for intended location and application. C. Comply with NFPA 70. 2.3 FUSIBLE SWITCHES A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Eaton. 2. General Electric Company. 3. Siemens Industry, Inc., Energy Management Division. 4. Square D; by Schneider Electric. B. Type HD, Heavy Duty: 1. Single throw. 2. Three pole. 3. 240 & 600-V ac. 4. 1200 A and smaller. 5. UL 98 and NEMA KS 1, horsepower rated, with clips or bolt pads to accommodate indicated fuses. 6. Lockable handle with capability to accept three padlocks, and interlocked with cover in closed position. C. Accessories: 1. Equipment Ground Kit: Internally mounted and labeled for copper and aluminum ground conductors. 2. Neutral Kit: Internally mounted; insulated, capable of being grounded and bonded; labeled for copper and aluminum neutral conductors. 3. Class R Fuse Kit: Provides rejection of other fuse types when Class R fuses are specified. 4. Lugs: Mechanical type, suitable for number, size, and conductor material. 5. Service-Rated Switches: Labeled for use as service equipment where applicable. 2.4 NONFUSIBLE SWITCHES A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Eaton. 2. General Electric Company. 3. Siemens Industry, Inc., Energy Management Division. 4. Square D; by Schneider Electric. B. Type HD, Heavy Duty, Three Pole, Single Throw, 240 & 600-V ac, 1200 A and Smaller: UL 98 and NEMA KS 1, horsepower rated, lockable handle with capability to accept three padlocks, and interlocked with cover in closed position. C. Accessories: 1. Equipment Ground Kit: Internally mounted and labeled for copper and aluminum ground conductors. 2. Neutral Kit: Internally mounted; insulated, capable of being grounded and bonded; labeled for copper and aluminum neutral conductors. 3. Class R Fuse Kit: Provides rejection of other fuse types when Class R fuses are specified. 4. Lugs: Mechanical type, suitable for number, size, and conductor material. 2.5 SHUNT TRIP SWITCHES A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Bussmann, an Eaton business. 2. Littelfuse, Inc. 3. Mersen USA. B. General Requirements: Comply with ASME A17.1, UL 50, and UL 98, with Class J fuse block and 200-kA interrupting and short-circuit current rating. C. Type HD, Heavy-Duty, Three Pole, Single-Throw Fusible Switch: rating as indicated on Drawings; UL 98 and NEMA KS 1; integral shunt trip mechanism; horsepower rated, with clips or bolt pads to accommodate indicated fuses; lockable handle with capability to accept three padlocks; interlocked with cover in closed position. D. Control Circuit: 120-V ac; obtained from integral control power transformer, with primary and secondary fuses, with a control power transformer of enough capacity to operate shunt trip, pilot, indicating and control devices. E. Accessories: 1. Oiltight key switch for key-to-test function. 2. Oiltight green ON pilot light. 3. Isolated neutral lug; 100 percent rating. 4. Mechanically interlocked auxiliary contacts that change state when switch is opened and closed. 5. Form C alarm contacts that change state when switch is tripped. 6. Three-pole, double-throw, fire-safety and alarm relay; 24-V dc coil voltage. 7. Three-pole, double-throw, fire-alarm voltage monitoring relay complying with NFPA 72. 8. Neutral Kit: Internally mounted; insulated, capable of being grounded and bonded; labeled for copper and aluminum neutral conductors. 9. Isolated Ground Kit: Internally mounted; insulated, labeled for copper and aluminum neutral conductors. 10. Class R Fuse Kit: Provides rejection of other fuse types when Class R fuses are specified. 11. Auxiliary Contact Kit: Two NO/NC (Form "C") auxiliary contact(s), arranged to activate before switch blades open. Contact rating -120-V ac. 12. Lugs: Mechanical type, suitable for number, size, and conductor material. 2.6 MOLDED-CASE CIRCUIT BREAKERS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Eaton. 2. General Electric Company. 3. Siemens Industry, Inc., Energy Management Division. 4. Square D; by Schneider Electric. B. Circuit breakers shall be constructed using glass-reinforced insulating material. Current carrying components shall be completely isolated from the handle and the accessory mounting area. C. Circuit breakers shall have a toggle operating mechanism with common tripping of all poles, which provides quick-make, quick-break contact action. The circuit-breaker handle shall be over center, be trip free, and reside in a tripped position between on and off to provide local trip indication. Circuit-breaker escutcheon shall be clearly marked on and off in addition to providing international I/O markings. Equip circuit breaker with a push-to-trip button, located on the face of the circuit breaker to mechanically operate the circuit-breaker tripping mechanism for maintenance and testing purposes. D. The maximum ampere rating and UL, IEC, or other certification standards with applicable voltage systems and corresponding interrupting ratings shall be clearly marked on face of circuit breaker. Circuit breakers may be series rated. Circuit breaker/circuit breaker combinations for series connected interrupting ratings shall be listed by UL as recognized component combinations. Any series rated combination used shall be marked on the end-use equipment along with the statement "Caution .Series Rated System. _____ Amps Available. Identical Replacement Component Required." E. MCCBs shall be equipped with a device for locking in the isolated position. F. Lugs shall be suitable for 194 deg F (90 deg C) rated wire, sized according to the 167 deg F (75 deg C) temperature rating in NFPA 70. G. Standard: Comply with UL 489 with interrupting capacity to comply with available fault currents. H. Thermal-Magnetic Circuit Breakers: Inverse time-current thermal element for low-level overloads and instantaneous magnetic trip element for short circuits. Adjustable magnetic trip setting for circuit-breaker frame sizes 250 A and larger. I. Electronic Trip Circuit Breakers: Field-replaceable rating plug, rms sensing, with the following field-adjustable settings as indicated on Drawings: 1. Instantaneous trip. 2. Long-and short-time pickup levels. 3. Long-and short-time time adjustments. 4. Ground-fault pickup level, time delay, and I-squared t response. J. Ground-Fault Circuit-Interrupter (GFCI) Circuit Breakers: Single-and two-pole configurations with Class A ground-fault protection (6-mA trip). K. Ground-Fault Equipment-Protection (GFEP) Circuit Breakers: With Class B ground-fault protection (30-mA trip). L. Features and Accessories: 1. Standard frame sizes, trip ratings, and number of poles. 2. Lugs: Mechanical type, suitable for number, size, trip ratings, and conductor material. 3. Application Listing: Appropriate for application. 4. Ground-Fault Protection: Comply with UL 1053; integrally mounted, self-powered type with mechanical ground-fault indicator; relay with adjustable pickup and time-delay settings, push-to-test feature, internal memory, and shunt trip unit; and three-phase, zero-sequence current transformer/sensor. 5. Shunt Trip: Trip coil energized from separate circuit, with coil-clearing contact. 2.7 ENCLOSURES A. Enclosed Switches and Circuit Breakers: UL 489, NEMA KS 1, NEMA 250, and UL 50, to comply with environmental conditions at installed location. B. Enclosure Finish: The enclosure shall be finished with gray baked enamel paint, electrodeposited on cleaned, phosphatized steel (NEMA 250 Type 1 or Type 3R as indicated on Drawings or as required for installation). C. Conduit Entry: NEMA 250 Types 4, 4X, and 12 enclosures shall contain no knockouts. NEMA 250 Types 7 and 9 enclosures shall be provided with threaded conduit openings in both endwalls. D. Operating Mechanism: The circuit-breaker operating handle shall be externally operable with the operating mechanism being an integral part of the box, not the cover. The cover interlock mechanism shall have an externally operated override. The override shall not permanently disable the interlock mechanism, which shall return to the locked position once the override is released. The tool used to override the cover interlock mechanism shall not be required to enter the enclosure in order to override the interlock. E. Enclosures designated as NEMA 250 Type 4, 4X stainless steel, 12, or 12K shall have a dual cover interlock mechanism to prevent unintentional opening of the enclosure cover when the circuit breaker is ON and to prevent turning the circuit breaker ON when the enclosure cover is open. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 EXAMINATION A. Examine elements and surfaces to receive enclosed switches and circuit breakers for compliance with installation tolerances and other conditions affecting performance of the Work. B. Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected. 1. Commencement of work shall indicate Installer's acceptance of the areas and conditions as satisfactory. 3.2 ENCLOSURE ENVIRONMENTAL RATING APPLICATIONS A. Enclosed Switches and Circuit Breakers: Provide enclosures at installed locations with the following environmental ratings. 1. Indoor, Dry and Clean Locations: NEMA 250, Type 1. 2. Outdoor Locations: NEMA 250, Type 3R. 3. Kitchen and Wash-Down Areas: NEMA 250, Type 4X,. 4. Other Wet or Damp, Indoor Locations: NEMA 250, Type 4. 5. Indoor Locations Subject to Dust, Falling Dirt, and Dripping Noncorrosive Liquids: NEMA 250, Type 12. 3.3 INSTALLATION A. Coordinate layout and installation of switches, circuit breakers, and components with equipment served and adjacent surfaces. Maintain required workspace clearances and required clearances for equipment access doors and panels. B. Install individual wall-mounted switches and circuit breakers with tops at uniform height unless otherwise indicated. C. Comply with mounting and anchoring requirements specified in Section 26 05 48.16 "Seismic Controls for Electrical Systems." D. Temporary Lifting Provisions: Remove temporary lifting of eyes, channels, and brackets and temporary blocking of moving parts from enclosures and components. E. Install fuses in fusible devices. F. Comply with NFPA 70 and NECA 1. 3.4 IDENTIFICATION A. Comply with requirements in Section 26 05 53 "Identification for Electrical Systems." 1. Identify field-installed conductors, interconnecting wiring, and components; provide warning signs. 2. Label each enclosure with engraved metal or laminated-plastic nameplate. 3.5 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Perform tests and inspections with the assistance of a factory-authorized service representative. B. Tests and Inspections for Switches: 1. Visual and Mechanical Inspection: a. Inspect physical and mechanical condition. b. Inspect anchorage, alignment, grounding, and clearances. c. Verify that the unit is clean. d. Verify blade alignment, blade penetration, travel stops, and mechanical operation. e. Verify that fuse sizes and types match the Specifications and Drawings. 2. Electrical Tests: a. Perform resistance measurements through bolted connections with a low-resistance ohmmeter. Compare bolted connection resistance values to values of similar connections. Investigate values that deviate from adjacent poles or similar switches by more than 50 percent of the lowest value. C. Tests and Inspections for Molded Case Circuit Breakers: 1. Visual and Mechanical Inspection: a. Verify that equipment nameplate data are as described in the Specifications and shown on the Drawings. b. Inspect physical and mechanical condition. c. Inspect anchorage, alignment, grounding, and clearances. d. Verify that the unit is clean. e. Operate the circuit breaker to ensure smooth operation. f. Perform adjustments for final protective device settings in accordance with the coordination study. 2. Electrical Tests: a. Perform resistance measurements through bolted connections with a low-resistance ohmmeter. Compare bolted connection resistance values to values of similar connections. Investigate values that deviate from adjacent poles or similar switches by more than 50 percent of the lowest value. 3. Correct malfunctioning units on-site, where possible, and retest to demonstrate compliance; otherwise, replace with new units and retest. 4. Perform the following infrared scan tests and inspections and prepare reports: a. Initial Infrared Scanning: After Substantial Completion, but not more than 60 days after Final Acceptance, perform an infrared scan of each enclosed switch and circuit breaker. Remove front panels so joints and connections are accessible to portable scanner. b. Follow-up Infrared Scanning: Perform an additional follow-up infrared scan of each enclosed switch and circuit breaker 11 months after date of Substantial Completion. c. Instruments and Equipment: Use an infrared scanning device designed to measure temperature or to detect significant deviations from normal values. Provide calibration record for device. 5. Test and adjust controls, remote monitoring, and safeties. Replace damaged and malfunctioning controls and equipment. D. Enclosed switches and circuit breakers will be considered defective if they do not pass tests and inspections. E. Prepare test and inspection reports. 1. Test procedures used. 2. Include identification of each enclosed switch and circuit breaker tested and describe test results. 3. List deficiencies detected, remedial action taken, and observations after remedial action. 3.6 ADJUSTING A. Adjust moving parts and operable components to function smoothly, and lubricate as recommended by manufacturer. B. Set field-adjustable circuit-breaker trip ranges as required in Section 26 05 73.16 "Coordination Studies." END OF SECTION SECTION 26 32 13 ENGINE GENERATORS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. This Section includes packaged engine-generator sets for standby power supply with the following features: 1. Diesel engine. 2. Unit-mounted cooling system. 3. Unit-mounted control and monitoring. 4. Performance requirements for sensitive loads. 5. Load banks. 6. Outdoor enclosure. B. Related Sections include the following: 1. Section 26 36 00 "Transfer Switches" for transfer switches including sensors and relays to initiate automatic-starting and -stopping signals for engine-generator sets. 1.3 DEFINITIONS A. Operational Bandwidth: The total variation from the lowest to highest value of a parameter over the range of conditions indicated, expressed as a percentage of the nominal value of the parameter. B. LP: Liquid petroleum. 1.4 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For each type of packaged engine generator indicated. Include rated capacities, operating characteristics, and furnished specialties and accessories. In addition, include the following: 1. Thermal damage curve for generator. 2. Time-current characteristic curves for generator protective device. B. Shop Drawings: Detail equipment assemblies and indicate dimensions, weights, loads, required clearances, method of field assembly, components, and location and size of each field connection. 1. Dimensioned outline plan and elevation drawings of engine-generator set and other components specified. 2. Design Calculations: Signed and sealed by a qualified professional engineer. Calculate requirements for selecting vibration isolators and seismic restraints and for designing vibration isolation bases. 3. Vibration Isolation Base Details: Signed and sealed by a qualified professional engineer. Detail fabrication, including anchorages and attachments to structure and to supported equipment. Include base weights. 4. Wiring Diagrams: Power, signal, and control wiring. 1.5 INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS A. Manufacturer Seismic Qualification Certification: Submit certification that day tank, engine-generator set, batteries, battery racks, accessories, and components will withstand seismic forces defined in Section 26 05 48.16 "Seismic Controls for Electrical Systems." Include the following: 1. Basis for Certification: Indicate whether withstand certification is based on actual test of assembled components or on calculation. a. The term "withstand" means "the unit will remain in place without separation of any parts from the device when subjected to the seismic forces specified." b. The term "withstand" means "the unit will remain in place without separation of any parts from the device when subjected to the seismic forces specified and the unit will be fully operational after the seismic event." 2. Dimensioned Outline Drawings of Equipment Unit: Identify center of gravity and locate and describe mounting and anchorage provisions. 3. Detailed description of equipment anchorage devices on which the certification is based and their installation requirements. B. Qualification Data: For [installer] [manufacturer] [and] [testing agency]. C. Source quality-control test reports. 1. Certified summary of prototype-unit test report. 2. Certified Test Reports: For components and accessories that are equivalent, but not identical, to those tested on prototype unit. 3. Certified Summary of Performance Tests: Certify compliance with specified requirement to meet performance criteria for sensitive loads. 4. Report of factory test on units to be shipped for this Project, showing evidence of compliance with specified requirements. 5. Report of sound generation. 6. Report of exhaust emissions showing compliance with applicable regulations. 7. Certified Torsional Vibration Compatibility: Comply with NFPA 110. D. Field quality-control test reports. E. Warranty: Special warranty specified in this Section. 1.6 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Operation and Maintenance Data: For packaged engine generators to include in emergency, operation, and maintenance manuals. In addition to items specified in Section 01 78 23 "Operation and Maintenance Data," include the following: 1. List of tools and replacement items recommended to be stored at Project for ready access. Include part and drawing numbers, current unit prices, and source of supply. 1.7 MAINTENANCE MATERIAL SUBMITTALS A. Furnish extra materials described below that match products installed and that are packaged with protective covering for storage and identified with labels describing contents. 1. Fuses: One for every 10 of each type and rating, but no fewer than one of each. 2. Indicator Lamps: Two for every six of each type used, but no fewer than two of each. 3. Filters: One set each of lubricating oil, fuel, and combustion-air filters. 1.8 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Installer Qualifications: Manufacturer's authorized representative who is trained and approved for installation of units required for this Project. 1. Maintenance Proximity: Not more than four hours' normal travel time from Installer's place of business to Project site. 2. Engineering Responsibility: Preparation of data for vibration isolators and seismic restraints of engine skid mounts, including Shop Drawings, based on testing and engineering analysis of manufacturer's standard units in assemblies similar to those indicated for this Project. B. Manufacturer Qualifications: A qualified manufacturer. Maintain, within 200 miles (321 km) of Project site, a service center capable of providing training, parts, and emergency maintenance repairs. C. Testing Agency Qualifications: An independent agency, with the experience and capability to conduct the testing indicated, that is a member company of the InterNational Electrical Testing Association or is a nationally recognized testing laboratory (NRTL), and that is acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction. 1. Testing Agency's Field Supervisor: Person currently certified by the InterNational Electrical Testing Association or the National Institute for Certification in Engineering Technologies to supervise on-site testing specified in Part 3. D. Source Limitations: Obtain packaged generator sets and auxiliary components through one source from a single manufacturer. E. Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, Article 100, by a testing agency acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction, and marked for intended use. F. Comply with ASME B15.1. G. Comply with NFPA 37. H. Comply with NFPA 70. I. Comply with NFPA 99. J. Comply with NFPA 110 requirements for Level 2 emergency power supply system. K. Comply with UL 2200. L. Engine Exhaust Emissions: Comply with applicable state and local government requirements. M. Noise Emission: Comply with applicable state and local government requirements for maximum noise level at adjacent property boundaries due to sound emitted by generator set including engine, engine exhaust, engine cooling-air intake and discharge, and other components of installation. 1.9 PROJECT CONDITIONS A. Interruption of Existing Electrical Service: Do not interrupt electrical service to facilities occupied by Owner or others unless permitted under the following conditions and then only after arranging to provide temporary electrical service according to requirements indicated: 1. Notify Owner no fewer than two days in advance of proposed interruption of electrical service. 2. Do not proceed with interruption of electrical service without Owner's written permission. B. Environmental Conditions: Engine-generator system shall withstand the following environmental conditions without mechanical or electrical damage or degradation of performance capability: 1. Ambient Temperature: Minus 15 to plus 40 deg C. 2. Relative Humidity: 0 to 95 percent. 3. Altitude: Sea level to 1000 feet (300 m). C. Unusual Service Conditions: Engine-generator equipment and installation are required to operate under the following conditions: 1. . 1.10 COORDINATION A. Coordinate size and location of concrete bases for package engine generators. Cast anchor-bolt inserts into bases. Concrete, reinforcement, and formwork requirements are specified with concrete. B. Coordinate size and location of roof curbs, equipment supports, and roof penetrations for remote radiators. These items are specified in Section 07 72 00 "Roof Accessories." 1.11 WARRANTY A. Special Warranty: Manufacturer's standard form in which manufacturer agrees to repair or replace components of packaged engine generators and associated auxiliary components that fail in materials or workmanship within specified warranty period. 1. Warranty Period: 5 years from date of Substantial Completion. 1.12 MAINTENANCE SERVICE A. Initial Maintenance Service: Beginning at Substantial Completion, provide 12 months' full maintenance by skilled employees of manufacturer's designated service organization. Include quarterly exercising to check for proper starting, load transfer, and running under load. Include routine preventive maintenance as recommended by manufacturer and adjusting as required for proper operation. Provide parts and supplies same as those used in the manufacture and installation of original equipment. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 MANUFACTURERS A. Available Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, manufacturers offering products that may be incorporated into the Work include, but are not limited to, the following: B. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: C. Basis-of-Design Product: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide the product indicated on Drawings or a comparable product by one of the following: 1. Caterpillar; Engine Div. 2. Generac Power Systems, Inc. 3. Kohler Co. 4. Magnetek, Inc. 5. Onan/Cummins Power Generation; Industrial Business Group. 6. Spectrum Detroit Diesel. 7. 2.2 ENGINE-GENERATOR SET A. Factory-assembled and -tested, engine-generator set. B. Mounting Frame: Maintain alignment of mounted components without depending on concrete foundation; and have lifting attachments. 1. Rigging Diagram: Inscribed on metal plate permanently attached to mounting frame to indicate location and lifting capacity of each lifting attachment and generator-set center of gravity. C. Capacities and Characteristics: 1. Power Output Ratings: Nominal ratings as indicated, with capacity as required to operate as a unit as evidenced by records of prototype testing. 2. Output Connections: Three-phase, four wire. 3. Nameplates: For each major system component to identify manufacturer's name and address, and model and serial number of component. D. Generator-Set Performance: 1. Steady-State Voltage Operational Bandwidth: 3 percent of rated output voltage from no load to full load. 2. Transient Voltage Performance: Not more than 20 percent variation for 50 percent step-load increase or decrease. Voltage shall recover and remain within the steady-state operating band within three seconds. 3. Steady-State Frequency Operational Bandwidth: 0.5 percent of rated frequency from no load to full load. 4. Steady-State Frequency Stability: When system is operating at any constant load within the rated load, there shall be no random speed variations outside the steady-state operational band and no hunting or surging of speed. 5. Transient Frequency Performance: Less than 5 percent variation for 50 percent step-load increase or decrease. Frequency shall recover and remain within the steady-state operating band within five seconds. 6. Output Waveform: At no load, harmonic content measured line to line or line to neutral shall not exceed 5 percent total and 3 percent for single harmonics. Telephone influence factor, determined according to NEMA MG 1, shall not exceed 50 percent. 7. Sustained Short-Circuit Current: For a 3-phase, bolted short circuit at system output terminals, system shall supply a minimum of 250 percent of rated full-load current for not less than 10 seconds and then clear the fault automatically, without damage to generator system components. 8. Start Time: Comply with NFPA 110, Type 10, system requirements. E. Generator-Set Performance for Sensitive Loads: 1. Oversizing generator compared with the rated power output of the engine is permissible to meet specified performance. a. Nameplate Data for Oversized Generator: Show ratings required by the Contract Documents rather than ratings that would normally be applied to generator size installed. 2. Steady-State Voltage Operational Bandwidth: 1 percent of rated output voltage from no load to full load. 3. Transient Voltage Performance: Not more than 10 percent variation for 50 percent step-load increase or decrease. Voltage shall recover and remain within the steady-state operating band within 0.5 second. 4. Steady-State Frequency Operational Bandwidth: Plus or minus 0.25 percent of rated frequency from no load to full load. 5. Steady-State Frequency Stability: When system is operating at any constant load within the rated load, there shall be no random speed variations outside the steady-state operational band and no hunting or surging of speed. 6. Transient Frequency Performance: Less than 2-Hz variation for 50 percent step-load increase or decrease. Frequency shall recover and remain within the steady-state operating band within three seconds. 7. Output Waveform: At no load, harmonic content measured line to neutral shall not exceed 2 percent total with no slot ripple. Telephone influence factor, determined according to NEMA MG 1, shall not exceed 50 percent. 8. Sustained Short-Circuit Current: For a 3-phase, bolted short circuit at system output terminals, system shall supply a minimum of 300 percent of rated full-load current for not less than 10 seconds and then clear the fault automatically, without damage to winding insulation or other generator system components. 9. Excitation System: Performance shall be unaffected by voltage distortion caused by nonlinear load. a. Provide permanent magnet excitation for power source to voltage regulator. 10. Start Time: Comply with NFPA 110, Type 10, system requirements. 2.3 ENGINE A. Fuel: [Fuel oil, Grade DF-2] [Natural gas with automatic LP-gas standby] [Natural gas]. 1. B. Rated Engine Speed: 1800 rpm. C. Maximum Piston Speed for Four-Cycle Engines: 2250 fpm (11.4 m/s). D. Lubrication System: The following items are mounted on engine or skid: 1. Filter and Strainer: Rated to remove 90 percent of particles 5 micrometers and smaller while passing full flow. 2. Thermostatic Control Valve: Control flow in system to maintain optimum oil temperature. Unit shall be capable of full flow and is designed to be fail-safe. 3. Crankcase Drain: Arranged for complete gravity drainage to an easily removable container with no disassembly and without use of pumps, siphons, special tools, or appliances. E. Engine Fuel System: 1. Main Fuel Pump: Mounted on engine. Pump ensures adequate primary fuel flow under starting and load conditions. 2. Relief-Bypass Valve: Automatically regulates pressure in fuel line and returns excess fuel to source. 3. Dual Natural Gas with LP-Gas Backup (Vapor-Withdrawal) System: a. Carburetor. b. Secondary Gas Regulators: One for each fuel type. c. Fuel-Shutoff Solenoid Valves: One for each fuel source. d. Flexible Fuel Connectors: One for each fuel source. F. Coolant Jacket Heater: Electric-immersion type, factory installed in coolant jacket system. Comply with NFPA 110 requirements for Level 1 equipment for heater capacity. G. Governor: [Mechanical] [Adjustable isochronous, with speed sensing]. H. Cooling System: Closed loop, liquid cooled, with radiator factory mounted on engine.generator-set mounting frame and integral engine-driven coolant pump. 1. Coolant: Solution of 50 percent ethylene-glycol-based antifreeze and 50 percent water, with anticorrosion additives as recommended by engine manufacturer. 2. Size of Radiator: Adequate to contain expansion of total system coolant from cold start to 110 percent load condition. 3. Expansion Tank: Constructed of welded steel plate and rated to withstand maximum closed-loop coolant system pressure for engine used. Equip with gage glass and petcock. 4. Temperature Control: Self-contained, thermostatic-control valve modulates coolant flow automatically to maintain optimum constant coolant temperature as recommended by engine manufacturer. 5. Coolant Hose: Flexible assembly with inside surface of nonporous rubber and outer covering of aging-, ultraviolet-, and abrasion-resistant fabric. a. Rating: 50-psig (345-kPa) maximum working pressure with coolant at 180 deg F (82 deg C), and noncollapsible under vacuum. b. End Fittings: Flanges or steel pipe nipples with clamps to suit piping and equipment connections. I. Cooling System: Closed loop, liquid cooled, with remote radiator and integral engine-driven coolant pump. 1. Configuration: Horizontal air discharge. 2. Radiator Core Tubes: Aluminum. 3. Size of Radiator: Adequate to contain expansion of total system coolant from cold start to 110 percent load condition. 4. Expansion Tank: Constructed of welded steel plate and rated to withstand maximum closed-loop coolant system pressure for engine used. Equip with gage glass and petcock. 5. Fan: Driven by multiple belts from engine shaft. 6. Coolant: Solution of 50 percent ethylene-glycol-based antifreeze and 50 percent water, with anticorrosion additives as recommended by engine manufacturer. 7. Temperature Control: Self-contained, thermostatic-control valve modulates coolant flow automatically to maintain optimum constant coolant temperature as recommended by engine manufacturer. J. Muffler/Silencer: Critical type, sized as recommended by engine manufacturer and selected with exhaust piping system to not exceed engine manufacturer's engine backpressure requirements. 1. Minimum sound attenuation of 25 dB at 500 Hz. 2. Sound level measured at a distance of 10 feet (3 m) from exhaust discharge after installation is complete shall be 85 dBA or less. K. Muffler/Silencer: Residential type, sized as recommended by engine manufacturer and selected with exhaust piping system to not exceed engine manufacturer's engine backpressure requirements. 1. Minimum sound attenuation of 18 dB at 500 Hz. 2. Sound level measured at a distance of 10 feet (3 m) from exhaust discharge after installation is complete shall be 95 dBA or less. L. Muffler/Silencer: Industrial type, sized as recommended by engine manufacturer and selected with exhaust piping system to not exceed engine manufacturer's engine backpressure requirements. 1. Minimum sound attenuation of 12 dB at 500 Hz. 2. Sound level measured at a distance of 25 feet (8 m) from exhaust discharge after installation is complete shall be 87 dBA or less. M. Air-Intake Filter: Standard-duty, engine-mounted air cleaner with replaceable dry-filter element and "blocked filter" indicator. N. Starting System: 12-V electric, with negative ground. 1. Components: Sized so they will not be damaged during a full engine-cranking cycle with ambient temperature at maximum specified in Part 1 "Project Conditions" Article. 2. Cranking Motor: Heavy-duty unit that automatically engages and releases from engine flywheel without binding. 3. Cranking Cycle: As required by NFPA 110 for system level specified. 4. Battery: Adequate capacity within ambient temperature range specified in Part 1 "Project Conditions" Article to provide specified cranking cycle at least twice without recharging. 5. Battery Cable: Size as recommended by engine manufacturer for cable length indicated. Include required interconnecting conductors and connection accessories. 6. Battery Compartment: Factory fabricated of metal with acid-resistant finish and thermal insulation. Thermostatically controlled heater shall be arranged to maintain battery above 10 deg C regardless of external ambient temperature within range specified in Part 1 "Project Conditions" Article. Include accessories required to support and fasten batteries in place. 7. Battery-Charging Alternator: Factory mounted on engine with solid-state voltage regulation and 35-A minimum continuous rating. 8. Battery Charger: Current-limiting, automatic-equalizing and float-charging type. Unit shall comply with UL 1236 and include the following features: a. Operation: Equalizing-charging rate of 10 A shall be initiated automatically after battery has lost charge until an adjustable equalizing voltage is achieved at battery terminals. Unit shall then be automatically switched to a lower float-charging mode and shall continue to operate in that mode until battery is discharged again. b. Automatic Temperature Compensation: Adjust float and equalize voltages for variations in ambient temperature from minus 40 deg C to plus 60 deg C to prevent overcharging at high temperatures and undercharging at low temperatures. c. Automatic Voltage Regulation: Maintain constant output voltage regardless of input voltage variations up to plus or minus 10 percent. d. Ammeter and Voltmeter: Flush mounted in door. Meters shall indicate charging rates. e. Safety Functions: Sense abnormally low battery voltage and close contacts providing low battery voltage indication on control and monitoring panel. Sense high battery voltage and loss of ac input or dc output of battery charger. Either condition shall close contacts that provide a battery-charger malfunction indication at system control and monitoring panel. f. Enclosure and Mounting: NEMA 250, Type 1, wall-mounted cabinet. 2.4 FUEL OIL STORAGE A. Comply with NFPA 30. B. Day Tank: Comply with UL 142, freestanding, factory-fabricated fuel tank assembly, with integral, float-controlled transfer pump and the following features: 1. Containment: Integral rupture basin with a capacity of 150 percent of nominal capacity of day tank. a. Leak Detector: Locate in rupture basin and connect to provide audible and visual alarm in the event of day-tank leak. 2. Tank Capacity: As recommended by engine manufacturer for an uninterrupted period of 48 hours' operation at 100 percent of rated power output of engine-generator system without being refilled. 3. Pump Capacity: Exceeds maximum flow of fuel drawn by engine-mounted fuel supply pump at 110 percent of rated capacity, including fuel returned from engine. 4. Low-Level Alarm Sensor: Liquid-level device operates alarm contacts at 25 percent of normal fuel level. 5. High-Level Alarm Sensor: Liquid-level device operates alarm and redundant fuel shutoff contacts at midpoint between overflow level and 100 percent of normal fuel level. 6. Piping Connections: Factory-installed fuel supply and return lines from tank to engine; local fuel fill, vent line, overflow line; and tank drain line with shutoff valve. 7. Redundant High-Level Fuel Shutoff: Actuated by high-level alarm sensor in day tank to operate a separate motor device that disconnects day-tank pump motor. Sensor shall signal solenoid valve, located in fuel suction line between fuel storage tank and day tank, to close. Both actions shall remain in shutoff state until manually reset. Shutoff action shall initiate an alarm signal to control panel but shall not shut down engine-generator set. C. Base-Mounted Fuel Oil Tank: Factory installed and piped, complying with UL 142 fuel oil tank. Features include the following: 1. Tank level indicator. 2. Capacity: Fuel for 48 hours' continuous operation at 100 percent rated power output. 3. Vandal-resistant fill cap. 4. Containment Provisions: Comply with requirements of authorities having jurisdiction. 2.5 CONTROL AND MONITORING A. Automatic Starting System Sequence of Operation: When mode-selector switch on the control and monitoring panel is in the automatic position, remote-control contacts in one or more separate automatic transfer switches initiate starting and stopping of generator set. When mode-selector switch is switched to the on position, generator set starts. The off position of same switch initiates generator-set shutdown. When generator set is running, specified system or equipment failures or derangements automatically shut down generator set and initiate alarms. Operation of a remote emergency-stop switch also shuts down generator set. B. Manual Starting System Sequence of Operation: Switching on-off switch on the generator control panel to the on position starts generator set. The off position of same switch initiates generator-set shutdown. When generator set is running, specified system or equipment failures or derangements automatically shut down generator set and initiate alarms. Operation of a remote emergency-stop switch also shuts down generator set. C. Configuration: Operating and safety indications, protective devices, basic system controls, and engine gages shall be grouped in a common control and monitoring panel mounted on the generator set. Mounting method shall isolate the control panel from generator-set vibration. D. Configuration: Operating and safety indications, protective devices, basic system controls, and engine gages shall be grouped in a common wall-mounted control and monitoring panel. E. Configuration: Operating and safety indications, protective devices, basic system controls, engine gages, instrument transformers, generator disconnect switch or circuit breaker, and other indicated components shall be grouped in a combination control and power panel. Control and monitoring section of panel shall be isolated from power sections by steel barriers. Panel features shall include the following: 1. Wall-Mounting Cabinet Construction: Rigid, self-supporting steel unit complying with NEMA ICS 6. Power bus shall be copper. Bus, bus supports, control wiring, and temperature rise shall comply with UL 891. 2. Switchboard Construction: Freestanding unit complying with Section 26 24 13 "Switchboards." 3. Switchgear Construction: Freestanding unit complying with Section 26 23 00 "Low-Voltage Switchgear." 4. Current and Potential Transformers: Instrument accuracy class. F. Indicating and Protective Devices and Controls: As required by NFPA 110 for Level 2 system, and the following: 1. AC voltmeter. 2. AC ammeter. 3. AC frequency meter. 4. DC voltmeter (alternator battery charging). 5. Engine-coolant temperature gage. 6. Engine lubricating-oil pressure gage. 7. Running-time meter. 8. Ammeter-voltmeter, phase-selector switch(es). 9. Generator-voltage adjusting rheostat. 10. Fuel tank derangement alarm. 11. Fuel tank high-level shutdown of fuel supply alarm. 12. Generator overload. G. Indicating and Protective Devices and Controls: 1. AC voltmeter. 2. AC ammeter. 3. AC frequency meter. 4. DC voltmeter (alternator battery charging). 5. Engine-coolant temperature gage. 6. Engine lubricating-oil pressure gage. 7. Running-time meter. 8. Ammeter-voltmeter, phase-selector switch(es). 9. Generator-voltage adjusting rheostat. 10. Start-stop switch. 11. Overspeed shutdown device. 12. Coolant high-temperature shutdown device. 13. Coolant low-level shutdown device. 14. Oil low-pressure shutdown device. 15. Fuel tank derangement alarm. 16. Fuel tank high-level shutdown of fuel supply alarm. 17. Generator overload. H. Supporting Items: Include sensors, transducers, terminals, relays, and other devices and include wiring required to support specified items. Locate sensors and other supporting items on engine or generator, unless otherwise indicated. I. Connection to Data Link: A separate terminal block, factory wired to Form C dry contacts, for each alarm and status indication is reserved for connections for data-link transmission of indications to remote data terminals. Data system connections to terminals are covered in Section 26 09 13 "Electrical Power Monitoring and Control." J. Common Remote Audible Alarm: Comply with NFPA 110 requirements for Level 1 systems. Include necessary contacts and terminals in control and monitoring panel. 1. Overcrank shutdown. 2. Coolant low-temperature alarm. 3. Control switch not in auto position. 4. Battery-charger malfunction alarm. 5. Battery low-voltage alarm. K. Common Remote Audible Alarm: Signal the occurrence of any events listed below without differentiating between event types. Connect so that after an alarm is silenced, clearing of initiating condition will reactivate alarm until silencing switch is reset. 1. Engine high-temperature shutdown. 2. Lube-oil, low-pressure shutdown. 3. Overspeed shutdown. 4. Remote emergency-stop shutdown. 5. Engine high-temperature prealarm. 6. Lube-oil, low-pressure prealarm. 7. Fuel tank, low-fuel level. 8. Low coolant level. L. Remote Alarm Annunciator: Comply with NFPA 99. An LED labeled with proper alarm conditions shall identify each alarm event and a common audible signal shall sound for each alarm condition. Silencing switch in face of panel shall silence signal without altering visual indication. Connect so that after an alarm is silenced, clearing of initiating condition will reactivate alarm until silencing switch is reset. Cabinet and faceplate are surface-or flush-mounting type to suit mounting conditions indicated. M. Remote Emergency-Stop Switch: Flush; wall mounted, unless otherwise indicated; and labeled. Push button shall be protected from accidental operation. 2.6 GENERATOR OVERCURRENT AND FAULT PROTECTION A. Generator Circuit Breaker: Molded-case, thermal-magnetic type; 100 percent rated; complying with NEMA AB 1 and UL 489. 1. Tripping Characteristic: Designed specifically for generator protection. 2. Trip Rating: Matched to generator rating. 3. Shunt Trip: Connected to trip breaker when generator set is shut down by other protective devices. 4. Mounting: Adjacent to or integrated with control and monitoring panel. B. Generator Circuit Breaker: Molded-case, electronic-trip type; 100 percent rated; complying with UL 489. 1. Tripping Characteristics: Adjustable long-time and short-time delay and instantaneous. 2. Trip Settings: Selected to coordinate with generator thermal damage curve. 3. Shunt Trip: Connected to trip breaker when generator set is shut down by other protective devices. 4. Mounting: Adjacent to or integrated with control and monitoring panel. C. Generator Circuit Breaker: Insulated-case, electronic-trip type; 100 percent rated; complying with UL 489. 1. Tripping Characteristics: Adjustable long-time and short-time delay and instantaneous. 2. Trip Settings: Selected to coordinate with generator thermal damage curve. 3. Shunt Trip: Connected to trip breaker when generator set is shut down by other protective devices. 4. Mounting: Adjacent to or integrated with control and monitoring panel. D. Generator Disconnect Switch: Molded-case type, 100 percent rated. 1. Rating: Matched to generator output rating. 2. Shunt Trip: Connected to trip switch when signaled by generator protector or by other protective devices. E. Generator Protector: Microprocessor-based unit shall continuously monitor current level in each phase of generator output, integrate generator heating effect over time, and predict when thermal damage of alternator will occur. When signaled by generator protector or other generator-set protective devices, a shunt-trip device in the generator disconnect switch shall open the switch to disconnect the generator from load circuits. Protector shall perform the following functions: 1. Initiates a generator overload alarm when generator has operated at an overload equivalent to 110 percent of full-rated load for 60 seconds. Indication for this alarm is integrated with other generator-set malfunction alarms. 2. Under single or three-phase fault conditions, regulates generator to 300 percent of rated full-load current for up to 10 seconds. 3. As overcurrent heating effect on the generator approaches the thermal damage point of the unit, protector switches the excitation system off, opens the generator disconnect device, and shuts down the generator set. 4. Senses clearing of a fault by other overcurrent devices and controls recovery of rated voltage to avoid overshoot. F. Ground-Fault Indication: Comply with NFPA 70, "Emergency System" signals for ground-fault. Integrate ground-fault alarm indication with other generator-set alarm indications. 2.7 GENERATOR, EXCITER, AND VOLTAGE REGULATOR A. Comply with NEMA MG 1. B. Drive: Generator shaft shall be directly connected to engine shaft. Exciter shall be rotated integrally with generator rotor. C. Electrical Insulation: Class H or Class F. D. Stator-Winding Leads: Brought out to terminal box to permit future reconnection for other voltages if required. E. Construction shall prevent mechanical, electrical, and thermal damage due to vibration, overspeed up to 125 percent of rating, and heat during operation at 110 percent of rated capacity. F. Enclosure: Dripproof. G. Instrument Transformers: Mounted within generator enclosure. H. Voltage Regulator: Solid-state type, separate from exciter, providing performance as specified. 1. Adjusting rheostat on control and monitoring panel shall provide plus or minus 5 percent adjustment of output-voltage operating band. I. Strip Heater: Thermostatically controlled unit arranged to maintain stator windings above dew point. J. Windings: Two-thirds pitch stator winding and fully linked amortisseur winding. K. Subtransient Reactance: 12 percent, maximum. 2.8 LOAD BANK A. Description: Permanent, outdoor, weatherproof, remote-controlled, forced-air-cooled, resistive and reactive unit capable of providing a balanced 3-phase, delta-connected load to generator set at 100 percent rated-system capacity, at 80 percent power factor, lagging. Unit may be composed of separate resistive and reactive load banks controlled by a common control panel. Unit shall be capable of selective control of load in 25 percent steps and with minimum step changes of approximately 5 and 10 percent available. B. Resistive Load Elements: Corrosion-resistant chromium alloy with ceramic and steel supports. Elements shall be double insulated and designed for repetitive on-off cycling. Elements shall be mounted in removable aluminized-steel heater cases. C. Reactive Load Elements: Epoxy-encapsulated reactor coils. D. Load-Bank Heat Dissipation: Integral fan with totally enclosed motor shall provide uniform cooling airflow through load elements. Airflow and coil operating current shall be such that, at maximum load, with ambient temperature at the upper end of specified range, load-bank elements operate at not more than 50 percent of maximum continuous temperature rating of resistance elements. E. Load Element Switching: Remote-controlled contactors switch groups of load elements. Contactor coils are rated 120 V. Contactors shall be located in a separate NEMA 250, Type 3R enclosure within load-bank enclosure, accessible from exterior through hinged doors with tumbler locks. F. Contactor Enclosures: Heated by thermostatically controlled strip heaters to prevent condensation. G. Load-Bank Enclosures: NEMA 250, Type 3R, complying with NEMA ICS 6. Louvers at cooling-air intake and discharge openings shall prevent entry of rain and snow. Openings for airflow shall be screened with 1/2-inch-(13-mm-) square, galvanized-steel mesh. Reactive load bank shall include automatic shutters at air intake and discharge. H. Protective Devices: Power input circuits to load banks shall be fused, and fuses shall be selected to coordinate with generator circuit breaker. Fuse blocks shall be located in contactor enclosure. Cooling airflow and overtemperature sensors shall automatically shut down and lock out load bank until manually reset. Safety interlocks on access panels and doors shall disconnect load power, control, and heater circuits. Fan motor shall be separately protected by overload and short-circuit devices. Short-circuit devices shall be noninterchangeable fuses with 200,000-A interrupting capacity. I. Remote-Control Panel: Separate from load bank in NEMA 250, Type 1 enclosure with a control power switch and pilot light, and switches controlling groups of load elements. J. Control Sequence: Control panel may be preset for adjustable single-step loading of generator during automatic exercising. 2.9 OUTDOOR GENERATOR-SET ENCLOSURE A. Description: Vandal-resistant, weatherproof steel housing, wind resistant up to 100 mph (160 km/h). Multiple panels shall be lockable and provide adequate access to components requiring maintenance. Panels shall be removable by one person without tools. Instruments and control shall be mounted within enclosure. B. Description: Prefabricated or preengineered walk-in enclosure with the following features: 1. Construction: Galvanized-steel, metal-clad, integral structural-steel-framed building erected on concrete foundation. 2. Structural Design and Anchorage: Comply with ASCE 7 for wind loads. 3. Space Heater: Thermostatically controlled and sized to prevent condensation. 4. Louvers: Equipped with bird screen and filter arranged to permit air circulation when engine is not running while excluding exterior dust, birds, and rodents. 5. Hinged Doors: With padlocking provisions. 6. Ventilation: Louvers equipped with bird screen and filter arranged to permit air circulation while excluding exterior dust, birds, and rodents. 7. Thermal Insulation: Manufacturer's standard materials and thickness selected in coordination with space heater to maintain winter interior temperature within operating limits required by engine-generator-set components. 8. Muffler Location: Within enclosure. C. Engine Cooling Airflow through Enclosure: Maintain temperature rise of system components within required limits when unit operates at 110 percent of rated load for 2 hours with ambient temperature at top of range specified in system service conditions. 1. Louvers: Fixed-engine, cooling-air inlet and discharge. Storm-proof and drainable louvers prevent entry of rain and snow. 2. Automatic Dampers: At engine cooling-air inlet and discharge. Dampers shall be closed to reduce enclosure heat loss in cold weather when unit is not operating. D. Interior Lights with Switch: Factory-wired, vaporproof-type fixtures within housing; arranged to illuminate controls and accessible interior. Arrange for external electrical connection. 1. AC lighting system and connection point for operation when remote source is available. 2. DC lighting system for operation when remote source and generator are both unavailable. E. Convenience Outlets: Factory wired, GFCI. Arrange for external electrical connection. 2.10 MOTORS A. General requirements for motors are specified in Section 23 05 13 "Common Motor Requirements for HVAC Equipment." 1. Motor Sizes: Minimum size as indicated. If not indicated, large enough so driven load will not require motor to operate in service factor range above 1.0. 2. Controllers, Electrical Devices, and Wiring: Electrical devices and connections are specified in electrical Sections. 2.11 VIBRATION ISOLATION DEVICES A. Elastomeric Isolation Pads: . 1. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 2. Basis-of-Design Product: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide product indicated on Drawings or comparable product by one of the following: a. Ace Mountings Co., Inc. b. California Dynamics Corporation. c. Isolation Technology, Inc. d. Kinetics Noise Control, Inc. e. Mason Industries, Inc. f. Vibration Eliminator Co., Inc. g. Vibration Isolation. h. Vibration Mountings & Controls, Inc. i. . 3. Fabrication: Single or multiple layers of sufficient durometer stiffness for uniform loading over pad area. 4. Size: Factory or field cut to match requirements of supported equipment. 5. Pad Material: Oil and water resistant with elastomeric properties. 6. Surface Pattern: Smooth pattern. 7. Infused nonwoven cotton or synthetic fibers. 8. Load-bearing metal plates adhered to pads. 9. Sandwich-Core Material: Resilient and elastomeric. a. Surface Pattern: Smooth pattern. b. Infused nonwoven cotton or synthetic fibers. B. Restrained Spring Isolators: Freestanding, Steel, Open-Spring Isolators with Vertical-Limit Stop Restraint in Two-Part Telescoping Housing: . 1. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by the following: 2. Basis-of-Design Product: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide or comparable product by one of the following: a. Ace Mountings Co., Inc. b. California Dynamics Corporation. c. Isolation Technology, Inc. d. Kinetics Noise Control, Inc. e. Mason Industries, Inc. f. Vibration Eliminator Co., Inc. g. Vibration Isolation. h. Vibration Mountings & Controls, Inc. i. . 3. Two-Part Telescoping Housing: A steel top and bottom frame separated by an elastomeric material and enclosing the spring isolators. Housings are equipped with adjustable snubbers to limit vertical movement. a. Drilled base housing for bolting to structure with an elastomeric isolator pad attached to the underside. Bases shall limit floor load to 500 psig (3447 kPa). b. Threaded top housing with adjustment bolt and cap screw to fasten and level equipment. 4. Outside Spring Diameter: Not less than 80 percent of the compressed height of the spring at rated load. 5. Minimum Additional Travel: 50 percent of the required deflection at rated load. 6. Lateral Stiffness: More than 80 percent of rated vertical stiffness. 7. Overload Capacity: Support 200 percent of rated load, fully compressed, without deformation or failure. 2.12 FINISHES A. Indoor and Outdoor Enclosures and Components: Manufacturer's standard finish over corrosion-resistant pretreatment and compatible primer. 2.13 SOURCE QUALITY CONTROL A. Prototype Testing: Factory test engine-generator set using same engine model, constructed of identical or equivalent components and equipped with identical or equivalent accessories. 1. Tests: Comply with NFPA 110, Level 1 Energy Converters and with IEEE 115. B. Project-Specific Equipment Tests: Before shipment, factory test engine-generator set and other system components and accessories manufactured specifically for this Project. Perform tests at rated load and power factor. Include the following tests: 1. Test components and accessories furnished with installed unit that are not identical to those on tested prototype to demonstrate compatibility and reliability. 2. Full load run. 3. Maximum power. 4. Voltage regulation. 5. Transient and steady-state governing. 6. Single-step load pickup. 7. Safety shutdown. 8. Provide 14 days' advance notice of tests and opportunity for observation of tests by Owner's representative. 9. Report factory test results within 10 days of completion of test. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 EXAMINATION A. Examine areas, equipment bases, and conditions, with Installer present, for compliance with requirements for installation and other conditions affecting packaged engine-generator performance. B. Examine roughing-in of piping systems and electrical connections. Verify actual locations of connections before packaged engine-generator installation. C. Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected. 3.2 INSTALLATION A. Comply with packaged engine-generator manufacturers' written installation and alignment instructions and with NFPA 110. B. Install packaged engine generator to provide access, without removing connections or accessories, for periodic maintenance. C. Install packaged engine generator on cast-in-place concrete equipment bases. Comply with requirements for equipment bases and foundations specified in Section 03 30 00 "Cast-in-Place Concrete." 1. Comply with requirements for seismic control devices specified in Section 26 05 48.16 "Seismic Controls for Electrical Systems." 2. Comply with requirements for vibration isolation devices specified in this section. D. Install remote radiator with [elastomeric isolator pads] [restrained spring isolators] having a minimum deflection of [1 inch (25 mm)] <Insert static deflection> on [concrete base on grade] [roof equipment supports on roof]. E. Install Schedule 40, black steel piping with welded joints for cooling water piping between engine-generator set and heat exchanger. Piping materials and installation requirements are specified in Section 23 21 13 "Hydronic Piping." F. Install Schedule 40, black steel piping with welded joints and connect to engine muffler. Install thimble at wall. Piping shall be same diameter as muffler outlet. Flexible connectors and steel piping materials and installation requirements are specified in Section 23 21 16 Hydronic Piping Specialties." 1. Install condensate drain piping to muffler drain outlet full size of drain connection with a shutoff valve, stainless-steel flexible connector, and Schedule 40, black steel pipe with welded joints. Flexible connectors and piping materials and installation requirements are specified in Section 23 21 16 Hydronic Piping Specialties." G. Electrical Wiring: Install electrical devices furnished by equipment manufacturers but not specified to be factory mounted. 3.3 CONNECTIONS A. Piping installation requirements are specified in other Sections. Drawings indicate general arrangement of piping and specialties. B. Connect fuel, cooling-system, and exhaust-system piping adjacent to packaged engine generator to allow service and maintenance. C. Connect cooling-system water piping to engine-generator set and heat exchanger with flexible connectors. D. Connect engine exhaust pipe to engine with flexible connector. E. Connect fuel piping to engines with a gate valve and union and flexible connector. 1. Diesel storage tanks, tank accessories, piping, valves, and specialties for fuel systems are specified in Section 23 11 13 "Facility Fuel-Oil Piping." 2. Natural-gas piping, valves, and specialties for gas distribution are specified in Section 23 11 23 "Facility Natural-Gas Piping." 3. LP-gas piping, valves, and specialties for gas piping are specified in Section 23 11 26 "Facility Liquefied-Petroleum Gas Piping." F. Ground equipment according to Section 26 05 26 "Grounding and Bonding for Electrical Systems." G. Connect wiring according to Section 26 05 19 "Low-Voltage Electrical Power Conductors and Cables." 3.4 IDENTIFICATION A. Identify system components according to Section 23 05 53 "Identification for HVAC Piping and Equipment" and Section 26 05 53 "Identification for Electrical Systems." 3.5 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Testing Agency: Owner will engage a qualified testing agency to perform tests and inspections and prepare test reports. B. Manufacturer's Field Service: Engage a factory-authorized service representative to inspect, test, and adjust components, assemblies, and equipment installations, including connections. Report results in writing. C. Perform tests and inspections and prepare test reports. 1. Manufacturer's Field Service: Engage a factory-authorized service representative to inspect components, assemblies, and equipment installations, including connections, and to assist in testing. D. Tests and Inspections: 1. Perform tests recommended by manufacturer and each electrical test and visual and mechanical inspection for "AC Generators and for Emergency Systems" specified in NETA Acceptance Testing Specification. Certify compliance with test parameters. 2. NFPA 110 Acceptance Tests: Perform tests required by NFPA 110 that are additional to those specified here including, but not limited to, single-step full-load pickup test. 3. Battery Tests: Equalize charging of battery cells according to manufacturer's written instructions. Record individual cell voltages. a. Measure charging voltage and voltages between available battery terminals for full-charging and float-charging conditions. Check electrolyte level and specific gravity under both conditions. b. Test for contact integrity of all connectors. Perform an integrity load test and a capacity load test for the battery. c. Verify acceptance of charge for each element of the battery after discharge. d. Verify that measurements are within manufacturer's specifications. 4. Battery-Charger Tests: Verify specified rates of charge for both equalizing and float-charging conditions. 5. System Integrity Tests: Methodically verify proper installation, connection, and integrity of each element of engine-generator system before and during system operation. Check for air, exhaust, and fluid leaks. 6. Exhaust-System Back-Pressure Test: Use a manometer with a scale exceeding 40-inch wg (120 kPa). Connect to exhaust line close to engine exhaust manifold. Verify that back pressure at full-rated load is within manufacturer's written allowable limits for the engine. 7. Exhaust Emissions Test: Comply with applicable government test criteria. 8. Voltage and Frequency Transient Stability Tests: Use recording oscilloscope to measure voltage and frequency transients for 50 and 100 percent step-load increases and decreases, and verify that performance is as specified. 9. Harmonic-Content Tests: Measure harmonic content of output voltage under 25 percent and at 100 percent of rated linear load. Verify that harmonic content is within specified limits. 10. Noise Level Tests: Measure A-weighted level of noise emanating from generator-set installation, including engine exhaust and cooling-air intake and discharge, at four locations on the property line, and compare measured levels with required values. E. Coordinate tests with tests for transfer switches and run them concurrently. F. Test instruments shall have been calibrated within the last 12 months, traceable to standards of NIST, and adequate for making positive observation of test results. Make calibration records available for examination on request. G. Leak Test: After installation, charge system and test for leaks. Repair leaks and retest until no leaks exist. H. Operational Test: After electrical circuitry has been energized, start units to confirm proper motor rotation and unit operation. I. Test and adjust controls and safeties. Replace damaged and malfunctioning controls and equipment. J. Remove and replace malfunctioning units and retest as specified above. K. Retest: Correct deficiencies identified by tests and observations and retest until specified requirements are met. L. Report results of tests and inspections in writing. Record adjustable relay settings and measured insulation resistances, time delays, and other values and observations. Attach a label or tag to each tested component indicating satisfactory completion of tests. M. Infrared Scanning: After Substantial Completion, but not more than 60 days after Final Acceptance, perform an infrared scan of each power wiring termination and each bus connection. Remove all access panels so terminations and connections are accessible to portable scanner. 1. Follow-up Infrared Scanning: Perform an additional follow-up infrared scan 11 months after date of Substantial Completion. 2. Instrument: Use an infrared scanning device designed to measure temperature or to detect significant deviations from normal values. Provide calibration record for device. 3. Record of Infrared Scanning: Prepare a certified report that identifies terminations and connections checked and that describes scanning results. Include notation of deficiencies detected, remedial action taken, and observations after remedial action. 3.6 DEMONSTRATION A. Engage a factory-authorized service representative to train Owner's maintenance personnel to adjust, operate, and maintain packaged engine generators. Refer to Section 01 79 00 "Demonstration and Training." END OF SECTION SECTION 26 32 15 ENGINE GENERATOR FIELD STARTUP REQUIREMENTS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SUMMARY A. Section Includes 1. Scope of Work 2. Materials and Equipment 3. Installation 4. Testing B. Scope of Work 1. Provide factory startup at the site by the local authorized dealer for the generator, enclosure, particle filter, fuel tank including mechanical inspection, electrical installation inspection, factory documented startup, and support for site Acceptance testing (Level 4) and Integration Systems Testing (Level 5), per startup schedule. 2. Provide a separate cost for a load bank for 100% load testing for level 4. Allow 2 days for testing at Level 4 per generator 3. Assume 2 days testing at Level 5 per generator. 4. These hours are over and above the time needed to connect the generator systems. 5. Load bank cables will be connected by the electrical Installer. The electrical Installer will provide a single point of contact to work with the generator vendor’s local distributor on the startup. 6. Fuel for testing is provided by Owner. 7. Comply with requirements for seismic, wind, snow, ice and flood as indicated in Section 26 00 10: 1.5 Regulatory Requirements 8. For remote batteries wire the temperature compensated feature of the battery charger. Provide wiring and sensor as required. 1.2 RELATED WORK A. Section 26 00 10 – Basic electrical requirements, is an integral part of this section. Requirements and work indicated in 26 00 10 are not repeated in this Section. B. Section 26 08 00 – Electrical General Commissioning Requirements. Provide Installer’s and Manufacturer’s support as required to coordinate with the Commissioning Agent and support all commissioning efforts and paperwork, acceptance and integrated testing. C. Section 26 32 13i – Engine Generator – Install 1.3 COORDINATION A. Coordinate work under provisions indicated in Section 26 00 10. 1.4 QUALIFICATIONS/QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Conform to requirements indicated in Section 26 00 10. B. Work shall be performed by an authorized dealer for the engine generator manufacturer. 1.5 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS A. Conform to requirements indicated in Section 26 00 09p. B. Electrical Code Compliance: Comply with applicable local code requirements of the authority having jurisdiction and NFPA 70 pertaining to construction and installation of engine-generator systems. C. NFPA Compliance: Comply with applicable requirements of NFPA 30 “Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code”, NFPA 37, "Installation and Use of Stationary Combustion Engines and Gas Turbines," and NFPA 110 “Standard for Emergency and Standby Power Systems” for a level 1 system. NFPA 20 “Fire Pumps”. D. UL Compliance: Comply with applicable requirements of the Underwriter's Laboratories including UL2200 – “Stationary Engine Generator Assemblies”. UL 142 “Steel Above Ground Tanks”. Alternate: UL 2085 “Protected Above Ground Tanks for flammable and combustible liquids with secondary containment”. E. ANSI/NEMA Compliance: Comply with applicable requirements of ANSI/NEMA MG 1, "Motors and Generators," and MG 2, "Safety and Use of Electric Motors and Generators." F. IEEE Compliance: Comply with applicable portions of IEEE Std 446, "IEEE Recommended Practice for Emergency and Standby Power Systems for Industrial and Commercial Applications." G. Insurance Underwriters Compliance: Comply with applicable requirements of the Owner's insurance underwriter Factory Mutual. H. Environmental Compliance: Comply with all federal and local applicable noise, hazardous materials, and emissions control standards and any authorities having jurisdiction. Packaged Generator set shall be certified and in compliance with emissions regulations. 1.6 SUBMITTALS A. Submit as required here in and under Section 26 00 09p. B. General Submittals: Manufacturer shall, upon receipt of an order, proceed immediately with submittal requirements described below to meet proposed shipment date of the equipment package to the site. Submit one fully detailed organized and marked up electronic PDF copy and three hard copies in three ring binders of the following: 1. Bill of Material -Itemized bill of materials for the major and minor systems and sub.systems. 2. Manufacturer's model numbers, brochures and system descriptions, including catalog cuts and/or data sheets describing the proposed equipment. Identify all options provided. C. Submit oil analysis report. 1.7 EXTRA MATERIALS A. Furnish under provisions indicated in Section 26 00 09p B. Provide the following additional materials: 1. One spare set of consumables such as fuses, filters, etc. 2. One spare set of air, fuel and oil filters in addition to those to be installed after acceptance and integrated systems testing. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 STARTING BATTERIES A. Starting Batteries: Heavy duty, diesel-starting type lead-acid storage batteries SAE group 8D. Match battery voltage to starting system. Size for at least four 30 second cranking periods at an ambient temperature of 0 degree F (assume blanket battery heater is not operational). Review requirements with engine generator specifications. 2.2 BATTERY HEATERS A. Thermostatically controlled blanket heater shall be arranged to maintain each battery above 10 deg C (50 F) regardless of external ambient temperature within range specified in generator specification Section paragraph 1.1B Performance Requirements. 2.3 BATTERY TRAY A. Provide acid resistant battery trays. Include accessories required to support and fasten batteries in place. B. Provide weather proof non-metallic battery boxes for redundant batteries located outside the enclosure if required. 2.4 BATTERY CHARGER A. Provide redundant battery chargers – SENS type NRG, no substitutions. B. Static Battery Charger: SENS NRG with battery monitoring, current-limiting automatic-equalizing and float-charging type. Provide parallel redundant 20A minimum battery chargers for each generator set battery bank. Generator sets incorporating two battery banks shall be provided with two charger sets separated by diodes so that a fault on one bank cannot effect the other. Units shall comply with UL 1236 and include the following features: 1. Operation: Equalizing-charging rate of 20 A shall be initiated automatically after battery has lost charge until an adjustable equalizing voltage is achieved at battery terminals. Unit shall then be automatically switched to a lower float-charging mode and shall continue to operate in that mode until battery is discharged again. 2. Automatic Temperature Compensation: Adjust float and equalize voltages for variations in ambient temperature from minus 40 deg C to plus 60 deg C to prevent overcharging at high temperatures and undercharging at low temperatures. 3. Automatic Voltage Regulation: Maintain constant output voltage regardless of input voltage variations up to plus or minus 10 percent. 4. Ammeter and Voltmeter: Flush mounted in door. Meters shall indicate charging rates. 5. Safety Functions: Sense abnormally low battery voltage and close contacts providing low battery voltage indication on control and monitoring panel. Sense high battery voltage and loss of ac input or dc output of battery charger. Either condition shall close contacts that provide a battery-charger malfunction indication at system control and monitoring panel. 6. Enclosure and Mounting: NEMA 250, Type 1, wall-mounted cabinet. 7. Output current rating of at least 1/20th of ampere-hour capacity of battery. The charger shall be capable of charging a fully discharged battery without damage to the charger. It shall be capable of returning a fully discharged battery to a fully charged condition within 24 hrs. 8. Automatic and manual switching between low rate (float) and high rate (equalize) mode. 9. Automatic cut-off switch when engine generator is operating. 10. Solid state rectifiers, DC voltmeter and ammeter, fused input and output, 120 VAC, 1 phase input and output VDC to match battery float/equalize voltage. 11. Malfunction alarm light for loss of AC voltage, low battery voltage, high battery voltage, loss of charge and battery failure or trouble. Provide two form "C" type auxiliary contacts for alarm summary remote signal. 12. Associated regulator to insure quick recharge of the batteries after an engine start. 2.5 BATTERY CABLE WITH LUGS A. Size as recommended by engine manufacturer for cable length required. Include required interconnecting conductors and connecting accessories. Include necessary cables and clamps. Size conductors to minimize total resistance, do not exceed manufacturer’s recommendation for total resistance including contacts and solenoids. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.2 INSTALLATION AND STARTUP A. Included in the startup: 1. Fuel tank and annular space pressure test 2. 4 level Fuel level sensor set up wiring to panel 3. Annular space sensor wiring to panel 4. Provide a fuel gauge dip stick 5. Check all vents and secure flanges. 6. Install fuel level gauge, on site 7. Overfill devices to be connected 8. Install over fill protection around the fuel fill port. 9. Provide and Connect fuel lines, supply and return 10. Furnish Batteries, mount batteries and connect batteries. Support all cables between terminals. 11. Provide wiring to the engine control panel so all battery charger alarms can be transmitted to the BMS system through the control panel Modbus interface. 12. Install Modbus interface. Coordinate and assist BMS installer 13. Provide engine-generator control panel programming and setup as required and requested. B. As a minimum, Level 4 acceptance testing shall include: 1. Start engine and then apply the following loads: a. 50% step load transient response showing frequency and voltage variation and recovery time both for application of load and for removal of load. This step load test shall be repeated a minimum of 4 times. b. 90% step load transient response showing frequency and voltage variation and recovery time both for application of load and for removal of load. c. 100% step load transient response showing frequency and voltage variation and recovery time both for application of load and for removal of load. 2. Before and after and at each step load monitor unit vibration. Record if it is out of specification. 3. 8 hours at 100% load at 1.0 power factor 4. Record amount of fuel burned during the 8 hour burn test. 5. Testing shall be conducted with the same type and constitution of coolant, oil, and other fluids as will be used in final site installation and as recommended by diesel engine generator manufacturer. 6. If engine is shut down for any component failure during the test, or if equipment does not meet performance requirements, the entire test shall be repeated after defects have been corrected. 7. Provide written report. 8. Coordinate testing with the Commissioning Agent. Cooperate and complete required testing. C. Provide battery cables with lugs, dual batteries and starters and blanket heaters.Provide wiring to generator control panel and coordinate interface with the BMS. D. Supervise work and assemble engine-generator, base mounted fuel tank and enclosure at the site. E. Provide a set of electrical schematics for the above equipment. F. Provide dual fuel and oil filters and associated valves and piping to allow filters to be charged while generator is operating. G. Provide water fuel separators with associated piping and valves to allow maintenance while generator is operating. 3.3 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Testing 1. Provide 8 hour full load test utilizing portable test bank. Simulate power failure, automatic starting cycle, and automatic shutdown and return to normal. 2. Record in 20 minute intervals during four hour test: a. Kilowatts. b. Amperes. c. Voltage. d. Power factor. e. DC Voltage. f. Jacket water temperature. g. Coolant temperature. h. Air temperature at air inlet to engine. i. Outdoor air temperature at source of ventilation air. j. Frequency. k. Oil pressure. l. Fuel pressure. m. Exhaust temperature. 3. Test starting, load shedding, alarm and shutdown circuits by simulating conditions. Verify BMS receives signals. 3.4 INTEGRATED SYSTEMS TESTING A. After completion of satisfactory start up and acceptance testing, Installer shall provide support for Integrated Testing, per the commissioning schedule. Assume two 12 hour days on site per engine generator. Provide cost for a per day additional cost. 3.5 Manufacturer to provide field technicians to Support Integrated Systems Testing (commissioning Level 5) in addition to and after successful competition of acceptance testing (Level 4). Provide for two 12 hour day(s) of Integrated Systems Testing for each engine-generator.TESTING CLOSEOUT A. After acceptance and integrated systems testing is complete perform an oil analysis. Report results in writing to Owner. B. After receiving oil analysis results replace air, fuel and oil filters. Save filters for analysis if warranted by the results of the oil analysis END OF SECTION SECTION 26 33 53 STATIC UNINTERRUPTIBLE POWER SUPPLY PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 SUMMARY A. Section Includes: 1. Installation of three-phase, on-line, double-conversion, static-type, multi-module UPS system. B. Meet the following performance requirements: 1. Wind, snow, ice, flood and earthquake Performance: UPS shall withstand the effects of earthquake motions determined according to ASCE/SEI 7. Refer to Section 26 00 10. 2. System shall be designed to not cause the system to have a leading power factor under low load conditions C. System Description: 1. This Section includes three-phase UPS Modules and System Controls in a multi-module, parallel redundant configuration, on-line, double-conversion, static-type, UPS installations complete with transient voltage surge suppression, input harmonics reduction via input filter, rectifier-charger, battery, battery disconnect device, inverter, static bypass transfer switch and external maintenance bypass/isolation switch. 1.2 RELATED WORK A. Section 26 00 10 – Basic Electrical Requirements, is an integral part of this section. Requirements and work indicated in 26 00 10 are not repeated in this Section. B. Section 26 08 00 – Electrical General Commissioning Requirements. Provide Installer’s support as required to coordinate with the Commissioning Agent. Support all commissioning efforts and paperwork, Acceptance and Integrated Systems Testing. 1.3 COORDINATION A. Coordinate work under provisions indicated in Section 26 00 10. 1.4 QUALIFICATIONS / QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Conform to requirements indicated in Section 26 00 10. 1.5 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS A. Conform to requirements indicated in Section 26 00 10. 1.6 SUBMITTALS A. Submit as required here in and under Section 26 00 10. 1.7 EXTRA MATERIALS A. Furnish under provisions indicated in Section 26 00 10. 1.8 PROJECT RECORD DOCUMENTS A. Submit under provisions indicated in Section 26 00 10. B. Provide list of all UPS settings and the values they are set to (e.g. max input current, reduced battery charging current, etc.) 1.9 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE DATA A. Submit under provisions indicated in Section 26 00 10. 1.10 WARRANTY A. Provide under provisions indicated in Section 26 00 10. PART 2 – PRODUCTS A. Refer to shop drawings for details of pre-purchased power distribution units. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 EXAMINATION A. Examine areas and conditions for compliance with requirements for conditions affecting performance of the UPS. B. Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected. 3.2 INSTALLATION A. Equipment Mounting: Install UPS on concrete base. Comply with requirements for concrete base specified in Division 03. 1. Install dowel rods to connect concrete base to concrete floor. Unless otherwise indicated, install dowel rods on 18-inch (450-mm) centers around the full perimeter of concrete base. 2. For supported equipment, install epoxy-coated anchor bolts that extend through concrete base and anchor into structural concrete floor. 3. Place and secure anchorage devices. Use setting drawings, templates, diagrams, instructions, and directions furnished with items to be 4. embedded. 5. Install anchor bolts to elevations required for proper attachment to supported equipment. B. Maintain minimum clearances and workspace at equipment according to manufacturer's written instructions and NFPA 70. C. Connections: Interconnect system components. Make connections to control supply and load circuits according to manufacturer's and project wiring diagrams unless otherwise indicated. D. All power and grounding connections shall use two hole long barrel compression lugs with inspection windows provided by Installer. E. Torque all bolted connections per Manufacturer's and NRTL listing requirements. Mark correct Torque location on bolt and bus with permanent marker. 3.3 GROUNDING A. Separately Derived Systems: Comply with NFPA 70 requirements for connecting to grounding electrodes and for bonding to metallic piping near isolation transformer. 3.4 IDENTIFICATION A. Identify components and wiring according to Division 26 Section "Identification for Electrical Systems." 1. Identify each battery cell individually. 3.5 ADJUSTMENTS A. Set up UPS system per requirements of the system descriptions and normal settings documents. B. Set all CB adjustable trips in UPS to maximum values. C. Set maximum input values to the following: 1. On normal power a. System: 100% b. Battery Charging: 15% 2. On generator power: a. System: 100% b. Battery Charging: 15% 3.6 BATTERY EQUALIZATION A. Equalize charging of battery cells according to manufacturer's written instructions. Record individual-cell voltages. B. Change batteries for at least 24 hours in an ambient of 25C (77F) before battery performance testing. 3.7 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Testing Agency: A qualified testing agency shall perform tests and inspections. B. Manufacturer's Field Service: Assist the commissioning agent and a factory-authorized service representative to inspect, test, and adjust components, assemblies, and equipment installations, including connections. C. Perform tests and inspections. 1. Manufacturer's Field Service: A factory-authorized service representative shall inspect components, assemblies, and equipment installations, including connections, and to assist in testing. D. Tests and Inspections: 1. Comply with manufacturer's written instructions. 2. Inspect interiors of enclosures, including the following: a. Integrity of mechanical and electrical connections. b. Component type and labeling verification. c. Ratings of installed components. 3. Inspect batteries and chargers according to requirements in NETA Acceptance Testing Specifications. 4. Test manual and automatic operational features and system protective and alarm functions. 5. Test communication of status and alarms to remote monitoring equipment. 6. Load the system using a variable-load bank to simulate kilovolt amperes, kilowatts, and unity power factor to unit's rating. Use instruments calibrated within the previous six months according to NIST standards. a. Simulate malfunctions to verify protective device operation. b. Test duration of supply on emergency, low-battery voltage shutdown, and transfers and restoration due to normal source failure. c. Test harmonic content of input and output current at 15, 25, 50, and 100 percent of rated loads. d. Test output voltage under specified transient-load conditions. e. Test efficiency at 15, 25, 50, 75, and 100 percent of rated loads. f. Test remote status and alarm panel functions. g. Test battery-monitoring system functions. 7. Verify temperature compensated battery charging battery charging is wired and operational. E. Seismic-restraint tests and inspections shall include the following: 1. Inspect type, size, quantity, arrangement, and proper installation of mounting or anchorage devices. 2. Test mounting and anchorage devices according to requirements in Division 26 Section "Vibration and Seismic Controls for Electrical Systems." F. The UPS system will be considered defective if it does not pass tests and inspections. G. Record of Tests and Inspections: Maintain and submit documentation of tests and inspections, including references to manufacturers' written instructions and other test and inspection criteria. Include results of tests, inspections, and retests. H. Prepare test and inspection reports. 3.8 PERFORMANCE TESTING A. A qualified power quality specialist shall perform tests and activities indicated for each UPS system. B. Monitoring and Testing Schedule: Perform monitoring and testing as coordinated with the commissioning. 1. Schedule monitoring and testing activity, with at least 14 days' advance notice. C. Monitoring and Testing Instruments: Three-phase, recording, power monitors. Instruments shall provide continuous simultaneous monitoring of electrical parameters at UPS input terminals and at input terminals of loads served by the UPS. Instruments shall monitor, measure, and graph voltage current and frequency simultaneously and provide full-graphic recordings of the values of those parameters before and during power-line disturbances that cause the values to deviate from normal beyond the adjustable threshold values. Instruments shall be capable of recording either on paper or on magnetic media and have a minimum accuracy of plus or minus 2 percent for electrical parameters. Parameters to be monitored include the following: 1. Current: Each phase and neutral and grounding conductors. 2. Voltage: Phase to phase, phase to neutral, phase to ground, and neutral to ground. 3. Frequency transients. 4. Voltage swells and sags. 5. Voltage Impulses: Phase to phase, phase to neutral, phase to ground, and neutral to ground. 6. High-frequency noise. 7. Radio-frequency interference.THD of the above currents and voltages. 8. Harmonic content of currents and voltages above. D. Monitoring and Testing Procedures: 1. Make recordings at various circuit locations and with various parameter-threshold and sampling-interval settings. Make these measurements with the objective of identifying optimum UPS, power system, load, and instrumentation setup conditions for subsequent test and monitoring operations. 2. Perform continuous monitoring during testing. a. Set thresholds and sampling intervals for recording data at values selected to optimize data on performance of the UPS for values indicated, and to highlight the need to adjust, repair, or modify the UPS, distribution system, or load component that may influence its performance or that may require better power quality. b. Perform load and UPS power source switching and operate the UPS on generator power during portions of test period according to directions of Owner's power quality specialist. c. Operate the UPS and its loads in each mode of operation permitted by UPS controls and by the power distribution system design. d. Using temporarily connected resistive load banks create and simulate unusual operating conditions, including outages, voltage swells and sags, and voltage, current, and frequency transients. e. Make adjustments and repairs to UPS, distribution, and load equipment to correct deficiencies disclosed by monitoring and testing and repeat appropriate monitoring and testing to verify success of corrective action. E. Coordination with Specified UPS Monitoring Functions: Obtain printouts of built-in monitoring functions specified for the UPS and its components in this Section that are simultaneously recorded with portable instruments in this article. 1. Provide the temporary use of an appropriate PC and printer equipped with required connections and software for recording and printing if such units are not available on-site. 2. Coordinate printouts with recordings for monitoring performed according to this article, and resolve and report any anomalies in and discrepancies between the two sets of records. F. Monitoring and Testing Assistance by Installer: 1. Open UPS and electrical distribution and load equipment and wiring enclosures to make monitoring and testing points accessible for temporary monitoring probe and sensor placement and removal as requested. 2. Observe monitoring and testing operations; ensure that UPS and distribution and load equipment warranties are not compromised. 3. Perform switching and control of various UPS units, electrical distribution systems, and load components as directed by power quality specialist. Specialist shall design this portion of monitoring and testing operations to expose the UPS to various operating environments, conditions, and events while response is observed, electrical parameters are monitored, and system and equipment deficiencies are identified. 4. Make repairs and adjustments to the UPS and to electrical distribution system and load components, and retest and repeat monitoring as needed to verify validity of results and correction of deficiencies. 5. Assist the UPS manufacturer's factory-authorized service representative periodically during performance testing operations for repairs, adjustments, and consultations. G. Documentation: Record test point and sensor locations, instrument settings, and circuit and load conditions for each monitoring summary and power disturbance recording. Coordinate simultaneous recordings made on UPS input and load circuits. 1. Verify operation of maintenance bypass SKRU interlock System. 2. Verify operation of temperature compensated battery charging. 3. Verify settings for maximum system input and battery changing current while on normal and when on generator power. 4. Verify wiring and operation of Switchboard interlock to prevent transfers from generator to utility while UPS is in bypass. H. Analysis of Recorded Data and Report: Review and analyze test observations and recorded data and submit a detailed written report. Include the following in each report: 1. Description of corrective actions performed during monitoring and survey work and their results. 2. Recommendations for further action to provide optimum performance by the UPS and appropriate power quality for non-UPS loads. Include a statement of priority ranking and a cost estimate for each recommendation that involves system or equipment revisions. 3. Copies of monitoring summary graphics and graphics illustrating harmonic content of significant voltages and currents. 4. Copies of graphics of power disturbance recordings that illustrate findings, conclusions, and recommendations. 5. Recommendations for operating, adjusting, or revising UPS controls. 6. Recommendation for alterations to the UPS installation. 7. Recommendations for adjusting or revising generator-set or automatic transfer switch installations or their controls. 8. Recommendations for power distribution system revisions. 9. Recommendations for adjusting or revising electrical loads, their connections, or controls. I. Interim and Final Reports: Provide an interim report at the end of each test period and a final comprehensive report at the end of final test and analysis period. 3.9 DEMONSTRATION A. Factory-authorized service representative to train Owner's maintenancepersonnel to adjust, operate, and maintain the UPS. 3.10 INTEGRATED TESTING A. Installer to provide support Integrated Systems Testing (commissioning level 5) in addition to and after successful completion of Acceptance Testing (commission level 4). Provide for (1) 12 hour day of Integrated Systems Testing for each UPS system (e.g. each UPS static switch/isolation bypass switch). END OF SECTION SECTION 26 36 00 TRANSFER SWITCHES PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Section includes automatic transfer switches rated 600 V and less, and may including the following: 1. Bypass/isolation switches. 2. Remote annunciator system. 3. Remote annunciator and control system. 1.3 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For each type of product. 1. Include construction details, material descriptions, dimensions of individual components and profiles, and finishes for transfer switches. 2. Include rated capacities, operating characteristics, electrical characteristics, and accessories. B. Shop Drawings: 1. Include plans, elevations, sections, details showing minimum clearances, conductor entry provisions, gutter space, and installed features and devices. 2. Include material lists for each switch specified. 3. Single-Line Diagram: Show connections between transfer switch, load, and where present, bypass/isolation switch, power sources, , annunciators, and control panels; and show interlocking provisions for each combined transfer switch and bypass/isolation switch. 1.4 INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS A. Qualification Data: For testing agency. B. Seismic Qualification Data: Certificates, for transfer switches, accessories, and components, from manufacturer. 1. Basis for Certification: Indicate whether withstand certification is based on actual test of assembled components or on calculation. 2. Dimensioned Outline Drawings of Equipment Unit: Identify center of gravity and locate and describe mounting and anchorage provisions. 3. Detailed description of equipment anchorage devices on which the certification is based and their installation requirements. C. Field quality-control reports. 1.5 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Operation and Maintenance Data: For each type of product to include in emergency, operation, and maintenance manuals. 1. In addition to items specified in Section 01 78 23 "Operation and Maintenance Data," include the following: a. Features and operating sequences, both automatic and manual. b. List of all factory settings of relays; provide relay-setting and calibration instructions, including software, where applicable. 1.6 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Testing Agency Qualifications: 1. Member company of NETA. a. Testing Agency's Field Supervisor: Certified by NETA to supervise on-site testing. 1.7 FIELD CONDITIONS A. Interruption of Existing Electrical Service: Do not interrupt electrical service to facilities occupied by Owner or others unless permitted under the following conditions and then only after arranging to provide temporary electrical service: 1. Notify Architect or Construction Manager no fewer than seven days in advance of proposed interruption of electric service. 2. Indicate method of providing temporary electrical service. 3. Do not proceed with interruption of electric service without Architect or Construction Manager's written permission. 4. Comply with NFPA 70E. 1.8 WARRANTY A. Manufacturer's Warranty: Manufacturer agrees to repair or replace components of transfer switch or transfer switch components that fail in materials or workmanship within specified warranty period. 1. Warranty Period: one year from date of Substantial Completion. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. B. Comply with NEMA ICS 1. C. Comply with NFPA 110. D. Comply with UL 1008 unless requirements of these Specifications are stricter. E. Indicated Current Ratings: Apply as defined in UL 1008 for continuous loading and total system transfer, including tungsten filament lamp loads not exceeding 30 percent of switch ampere rating, unless otherwise indicated. F. Tested Fault-Current Closing and Short-Circuit Ratings: Adequate for duty imposed by protective devices at installation locations in Project under the fault conditions indicated, based on testing according to UL 1008. 1. Short-time withstand capability for three cycles. G. Repetitive Accuracy of Solid-State Controls: All settings shall be plus or minus 2 percent or better over an operating temperature range of minus 20 to plus 70 deg C. H. Resistance to Damage by Voltage Transients: Components shall meet or exceed voltage-surge withstand capability requirements when tested according to IEEE C62.62. Components shall meet or exceed voltage-impulse withstand test of NEMA ICS 1. I. Electrical Operation: Accomplish by a nonfused, momentarily energized solenoid or electric-motor-operated mechanism. Switches for emergency or standby purposes shall be mechanically and electrically interlocked in both directions to prevent simultaneous connection to both power sources unless closed transition. J. Service-Rated Transfer Switch: 1. Comply with UL 869A and UL 489. 2. Provide terminals for bonding the grounding electrode conductor to the grounded service conductor. 3. In systems with a neutral, the bonding connection shall be on the neutral bus. 4. Provide removable link for temporary separation of the service and load grounded conductors. 5. Surge Protective Device: Service rated. 6. Ground-Fault Protection: Comply with UL 1008 for normal bus. 7. Service Disconnecting Means: Externally operated, manual mechanically actuated. K. Neutral Switching: Where four-pole switches are indicated, provide neutral pole switched simultaneously with phase poles and overlapping neutral contacts. L. Neutral Terminal: Where Solid-Neutral is indicated, provide solid, isolated, and fully rated bus unless otherwise indicated. M. Annunciation, Control, and Programming Interface Components: Devices at transfer switches for communicating with remote programming devices, annunciators, or annunciator and control panels shall have communication capability matched with remote device. N. Factory Wiring: Train and bundle factory wiring and label, consistent with Shop Drawings, by color-code or by numbered or lettered wire and cable with printed tape or shrinkable sleeve markers at terminations. Color-coding and wire and cable markers are specified in Section 26 05 53 "Identification for Electrical Systems." 1. Designated Terminals: Pressure type, suitable for types and sizes of field wiring indicated. 2. Power-Terminal Arrangement and Field-Wiring Space: Suitable for top, side, or bottom entrance of feeder conductors as indicated. 3. Control Wiring: Equipped with lugs suitable for connection to terminal strips. 4. Accessible via front access. O. Enclosures: General-purpose NEMA 250, Type 1, complying with NEMA ICS 6 and UL 508, unless otherwise indicated. 2.2 CONTACTOR-TYPE AUTOMATIC TRANSFER SWITCHES A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. ASCO. 2. Caterpillar, Inc.; Electric Power Division. 3. Cummins Power Generation. 4. GE Zenith Controls. 5. Generac Power Systems, Inc. 6. Kohler Power Systems. 7. MTU Onsite Energy Corporation. 8. Russelectric, Inc. B. Comply with Level 1 equipment according to NFPA 110. C. Switch Characteristics: Designed for continuous-duty repetitive transfer of full-rated current between active power sources. 1. Limitation: Switches using molded-case switches or circuit breakers or insulated-case 2. Switch Action: Double throw; mechanically held in both directions. 3. Contacts: Silver composition or silver alloy for load-current switching. Contactor.style automatic transfer-switch units, rated 600 A and higher, shall have separate arcing contacts. 4. Conductor Connectors: Suitable for use with conductor material and sizes. 5. Material: Tin-plated aluminum. 6. Main and Neutral Lugs: Mechanical type. 7. Ground Lugs and Bus-Configured Terminators: Mechanical type. 8. Ground bar. 9. Connectors shall be marked for conductor size and type according to UL 1008. D. Automatic Open-Transition Transfer Switches: Interlocked to prevent the load from being closed on both sources at the same time. 1. Sources shall be mechanically and electrically interlocked to prevent closing both sources on the load at the same time. E. Automatic Delayed-Transition Transfer Switches: Pauses or stops in intermediate position to momentarily disconnect both sources, with transition controlled by programming in the automatic transfer-switch controller. Interlocked to prevent the load from being closed on both sources at the same time. 1. Adjustable Time Delay: For override of normal-source voltage sensing to delay transfer and engine start signals for alternative source. Adjustable from zero to six seconds, and factory set for one second. 2. Sources shall be mechanically and electrically interlocked to prevent closing both sources on the load at the same time. 3. Fully automatic break-before-make operation with center off position. F. Automatic Closed-Transition Transfer Switches: Connect both sources to load momentarily. Transition is controlled by programming in the automatic transfer-switch controller. 1. Fully automatic make-before-break operation when transferring between two available power sources. 2. Load transfer without interruption, through momentary interconnection of both power sources not exceeding 100 ms. 3. Initiation of No-Interruption Transfer: Controlled by in-phase monitor and sensors confirming both sources are present and acceptable. a. Initiation occurs without active control of generator. b. Controls ensure that closed-transition load transfer closure occurs only when the two sources are within plus or minus 5 electrical degrees maximum, and plus or minus 5 percent maximum voltage difference. 4. Failure of power source serving load initiates automatic break-before-make transfer. G. Electric Switch Operation: Electrically actuated by push buttons designated "Normal Source" and "Alternative Source." Switch shall be capable of transferring load in either direction with either or both sources energized. H. Signal-Before-Transfer Contacts: A set of normally open/normally closed dry contacts operates in advance of retransfer to normal source. Interval shall be adjustable from 1 to 30 seconds. I. Digital Communication Interface: Matched to capability of remote annunciator or annunciator and control panel. J. Automatic Transfer-Switch Controller Features: 1. Controller operates through a period of loss of control power. 2. Undervoltage Sensing for Each Phase of Normal and Alternate Source: Sense low phase-to-ground voltage on each phase. Pickup voltage shall be adjustable from 85 to 100 percent of nominal, and dropout voltage shall be adjustable from 75 to 98 percent of pickup value. Factory set for pickup at 90 percent and dropout at 85 percent. 3. Voltage/Frequency Lockout Relay: Prevent premature transfer to generator. Pickup voltage shall be adjustable from 85 to 100 percent of nominal. Factory set for pickup at 90 percent. Pickup frequency shall be adjustable from 90 to 100 percent of nominal. Factory set for pickup at 95 percent. 4. Time Delay for Retransfer to Normal Source: Adjustable from zero to 30 minutes, and factory set for 10 minutes. Override shall automatically defeat delay on loss of voltage or sustained undervoltage of emergency source, provided normal supply has been restored. 5. Test Switch: Simulate normal-source failure. 6. Switch-Position Pilot Lights: Indicate source to which load is connected. 7. Source-Available Indicating Lights: Supervise sources via transfer-switch normal-and emergency-source sensing circuits. a. Normal Power Supervision: Green light with nameplate engraved "Normal Source Available." b. Emergency Power Supervision: Red light with nameplate engraved "Emergency Source Available." 8. Unassigned Auxiliary Contacts: Two normally open, single-pole, double-throw contacts for each switch position, rated 10 A at 240-V ac. 9. Transfer Override Switch: Overrides automatic retransfer control so transfer switch will remain connected to emergency power source regardless of condition of normal source. Pilot light indicates override status. 10. Engine Starting Contacts: One isolated and normally closed, and one isolated and normally open; rated 10 A at 32-V dc minimum. 11. Engine Shutdown Contacts: Time delay adjustable from zero to five minutes, and factory set for five minutes. Contacts shall initiate shutdown at remote engine-generator controls after retransfer of load to normal source. 12. Engine-Generator Exerciser: Solid-state, programmable-time switch starts engine generator and transfers load to it from normal source for a preset time, then retransfers and shuts down engine after a preset cool-down period. Initiates exercise cycle at preset intervals adjustable from 7 to 30 days. Running periods shall be adjustable from 10 to 30 minutes. Factory settings shall be for 7-day exercise cycle, 20-minute running period, and 5-minute cool-down period. Exerciser features include the following: a. Exerciser Transfer Selector Switch: Permits selection of exercise with and without load transfer. b. Push-button programming control with digital display of settings. c. Integral battery operation of time switch when normal control power is unavailable. K. Large-Motor-Load Power Transfer: 1. In-Phase Monitor: Factory-wired, internal relay controls transfer so contacts close only when the two sources are synchronized in phase and frequency. Relay shall compare phase relationship and frequency difference between normal and emergency sources and initiate transfer when both sources are within 15 electrical degrees, and only if transfer can be completed within 60 electrical degrees. Transfer shall be initiated only if both sources are within 2 Hz of nominal frequency and 70 percent or more of nominal voltage. 2. Motor Disconnect and Timing Relay Controls: Designated starters in loss of power scenario shall disconnect motors before transfer and reconnect them selectively at an adjustable time interval after transfer. Control connection to motor starters shall be through wiring external to automatic transfer switch. Provide adjustable time delay between 1 and 60 seconds for reconnecting individual motor loads. Provide relay contacts rated for motor-control circuit inrush and for actual seal currents to be encountered. 3. Programmed Neutral Switch Position: Switch operator with programmed neutral position arranged to provide a midpoint between the two working switch positions, with an intentional, time-controlled pause at midpoint during transfer. Adjustable pause from 0.5 to 30 seconds minimum, and factory set for 0.5 second unless otherwise indicated. Time delay occurs for both transfer directions. Disable pause unless both sources are live. 2.3 TRANSFER SWITCH ACESSORIES A. Bypass/Isolation Switches: 1. Source Limitations: Same manufacturer as transfer switch in which installed. 2. Comply with requirements for Level 1 equipment according to NFPA 110. 3. Description: Manual type, arranged to select and connect either source of power directly to load, isolating transfer switch from load and from both power sources. Include the following features for each combined automatic transfer switch and bypass/isolation switch: a. Means to lock bypass/isolation switch in the position that isolates transfer switch with an arrangement that permits complete electrical testing of transfer switch while isolated. Interlocks shall prevent transfer-switch operation, except for testing or maintenance, while automatic transfer switch is isolated. b. Provide means to make power available to transfer-switch control circuit for testing and maintenance purposes. c. Drawout Arrangement for Transfer Switch: Provide physical separation from live parts and accessibility for testing and maintenance operations. Transfer switch and bypass/isolation switch shall be in isolated compartments. d. Transition: Provide closed-transition operation when transferring from main transfer switch to bypass/isolation switch on the same power source. e. Transition: Provide open-transition operation when transferring between power sources. f. Bypass/Isolation Switch Current, Voltage, Closing, and Short-Circuit Withstand Ratings: Equal to or greater than those of associated automatic transfer switch, and with same phase arrangement and number of poles. g. Contact temperatures of bypass/isolation switches shall not exceed those of automatic transfer-switch contacts when they are carrying rated load. h. Manual Control: Constructed so load bypass and transfer-switch isolation can be performed by one person in no more than two operations in 15 seconds or less. Operating handles shall be externally operated. i. Automatic and Nonautomatic Control: Automatic transfer-switch controller shall also control the bypass/isolation switch. j. Legend: Manufacturer's standard legend for control labels and instruction signs shall describe operating instructions. k. Maintainability: Fabricate to allow convenient removal of major components from front without removing other parts or main power conductors. 4. Interconnection of Bypass/Isolation Switches with Automatic Transfer Switches: Factory-installed copper bus bars; plated at connection points and braced for the indicated available short-circuit current. B. Remote Annunciator System: 1. Source Limitations: Same manufacturer as transfer switch in which installed. 2. Functional Description: Remote annunciator panel shall annunciate conditions for indicated transfer switches. 3. Annunciation panel display shall include the following indicators: a. Sources available, as defined by actual pickup and dropout settings of transfer-switch controls. b. Switch position. c. Switch in test mode. d. Failure of communication link. 4. Annunciator Panel: LED-lamp type with audible signal and silencing switch. a. Indicating Lights: Grouped for each transfer switch monitored. b. Label each group, indicating transfer switch it monitors, location of switch, and identity of load it serves. c. Mounting: Flush, modular, steel cabinet unless otherwise indicated. d. Lamp Test: Push-to-test or lamp-test switch on front panel. C. Remote Annunciator and Control System: 1. Source Limitations: Same manufacturer as transfer switch in which installed. 2. Include the following functions for indicated transfer switches: a. Indication of sources available, as defined by actual pickup and dropout settings of transfer-switch controls. b. Indication of switch position. c. Indication of switch in test mode. d. Indication of failure of digital communication link. e. Key-switch or user-code access to control functions of panel. f. Control of switch-test initiation. g. Control of switch operation in either direction. 3. Malfunction of annunciator, annunciation and control panel, or communication link shall not affect functions of automatic transfer switch. In the event of failure of communication link, automatic transfer switch automatically shall revert to standalone, self-contained operation. Automatic transfer-switch sensing, controlling, or operating function shall not depend on remote panel for proper operation. 4. Remote Annunciation and Control Panel: Solid-state components. Include the following features: a. Controls and indicating lights grouped together for each transfer switch. b. Label each indicating light control group. Indicate transfer switch it controls, location of switch, and load it serves. c. Digital Communication Capability: Matched to that of transfer switches supervised. d. Mounting: Flush, modular, steel cabinet unless otherwise indicated. 2.4 SOURCE QUALITY CONTROL A. Factory Tests: Test and inspect components, assembled switches, and associated equipment according to UL 1008. Ensure proper operation. Check transfer time and voltage, frequency, and time-delay settings for compliance with specified requirements. Perform dielectric strength test complying with NEMA ICS 1. B. Prepare test and inspection reports. 1. For each of the tests required by UL 1008, performed on representative devices, for emergency and legally required systems. Include results of test for the following conditions: a. Overvoltage. b. Undervoltage. c. Loss of supply voltage. d. Reduction of supply voltage. e. Alternative supply voltage or frequency is at minimum acceptable values. f. Temperature rise. g. Dielectric voltage-withstand; before and after short-circuit test. h. Overload. i. Contact opening. j. Endurance. k. Short circuit. l. Short-time current capability. m. Receptacle withstand capability. n. Insulating base and supports damage. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 INSTALLATION A. Floor-Mounting Switch: Anchor to floor by bolting. 1. Install transfer switches on cast-in-place concrete equipment base(s). Comply with requirements for equipment bases and foundations specified in Section 03 30 00 "Cast-in-Place Concrete." 2. Comply with requirements for seismic control devices specified in Section 26 05 48.16 "Seismic Controls for Electrical Systems." 3. Coordinate size and location of concrete bases. Cast anchor-bolt inserts into bases. 4. Provide workspace and clearances required by NFPA 70. B. Annunciator and Control Panel Mounting: Flush in wall unless otherwise indicated. C. Identify components according to Section 26 05 53 "Identification for Electrical Systems." D. Set field-adjustable intervals and delays, relays, and engine exerciser clock. E. Comply with NECA 1. 3.2 CONNECTIONS A. Wiring to Remote Components: Match type and number of cables and conductors to generator sets and any control or communication requirements of transfer switches as recommended by manufacturer. Increase raceway sizes at no additional cost to Owner if necessary to B. Wiring Method: Install cables in raceways and cable trays except within electrical enclosures. Conceal raceway and cables except in unfinished spaces. 1. Comply with requirements for raceways and boxes specified in Section 26 05 33 "Raceways and Boxes for Electrical Systems." C. Wiring within Enclosures: Bundle, lace, and train conductors to terminal points with no excess and without exceeding manufacturer's limitations on bending radii. D. Ground equipment according to Section 26 05 26 "Grounding and Bonding for Electrical Systems." E. Connect wiring according to Section 26 05 19 "Low-Voltage Electrical Power Conductors and Cables." F. Connect twisted pair cable according to Section 26 05 23 "Control-Voltage Electrical Power Cables." G. Connect twisted pair cable according to Section 27 15 13 "Communications Copper Horizontal Cabling." H. Route and brace conductors according to manufacturer's written instructions. Do not obscure manufacturer's markings and labels. I. Brace and support equipment according to Section 26 05 48.16 "Seismic Controls for Electrical Systems." J. Final connections to equipment shall be made with liquidtight, flexible metallic conduit no more than 18 inches (457 mm) in length. 3.3 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Testing Agency: Owner will engage a qualified testing agency to perform tests and inspections. B. Manufacturer's Field Service: Engage a factory-authorized service representative to test and inspect components, assemblies, and equipment installations, including connections. C. Perform the following tests and inspections[ with the assistance of a factory-authorized service representative]: 1. After installing equipment, test for compliance with requirements according to NETA ATS. 2. Visual and Mechanical Inspection: a. Compare equipment nameplate data with Drawings and Specifications. b. Inspect physical and mechanical condition. c. Inspect anchorage, alignment, grounding, and required clearances. d. Verify that the unit is clean. e. Verify appropriate lubrication on moving current-carrying parts and on moving and sliding surfaces. f. Verify that manual transfer warnings are attached and visible. g. Verify tightness of all control connections. h. Inspect bolted electrical connections for high resistance using one of the following methods, or both: 1) Use of low-resistance ohmmeter. 2) Verify tightness of accessible bolted electrical connections by calibrated torque-wrench method according to manufacturer's published data. i. Perform manual transfer operation. j. Verify positive mechanical interlocking between normal and alternate sources. k. Perform visual and mechanical inspection of surge arresters. l. Inspect control power transformers. 1) Inspect for physical damage, cracked insulation, broken leads, tightness of connections, defective wiring, and overall general condition. 2) Verify that primary and secondary fuse or circuit-breaker ratings match Drawings. 3) Verify correct functioning of drawout disconnecting contacts, grounding contacts, and interlocks. 3. Electrical Tests: a. Perform insulation-resistance tests on all control wiring with respect to ground. b. Perform a contact/pole-resistance test. Compare measured values with manufacturer's acceptable values. c. Verify settings and operation of control devices. d. Calibrate and set all relays and timers. e. Verify phase rotation, phasing, and synchronized operation. f. Perform automatic transfer tests. g. Verify correct operation and timing of the following functions: 1) Normal source voltage-sensing and frequency-sensing relays. 2) Engine start sequence. 3) Time delay on transfer. 4) Alternative source voltage-sensing and frequency-sensing relays. 5) Automatic transfer operation. 6) Interlocks and limit switch function. 7) Time delay and retransfer on normal power restoration. 8) Engine cool-down and shutdown feature. 4. Measure insulation resistance phase-to-phase and phase-to-ground with insulation-resistance tester. Include external annunciation and control circuits. Use test voltages and procedure recommended by manufacturer. Comply with manufacturer's specified minimum resistance. a. Check for electrical continuity of circuits and for short circuits. b. Inspect for physical damage, proper installation and connection, and integrity of barriers, covers, and safety features. c. Verify that manual transfer warnings are properly placed. d. Perform manual transfer operation. 5. After energizing circuits, perform each electrical test for transfer switches stated in NETA ATS and demonstrate interlocking sequence and operational function for each switch at least three times. a. Simulate power failures of normal source to automatic transfer switches and retransfer from emergency source with normal source available. b. Simulate loss of phase-to-ground voltage for each phase of normal source. c. Verify time-delay settings. d. Verify pickup and dropout voltages by data readout or inspection of control settings. e. Test bypass/isolation unit functional modes and related automatic transfer-switch operations. f. Perform contact-resistance test across main contacts and correct values exceeding 500 microhms and values for one pole deviating by more than 50 percent from other poles. g. Verify proper sequence and correct timing of automatic engine starting, transfer time delay, retransfer time delay on restoration of normal power, and engine cool-down and shutdown. 6. Ground-Fault Tests: Coordinate with testing of ground-fault protective devices for power delivery from both sources. a. Verify grounding connections and locations and ratings of sensors. b. Observe reaction of circuit-interrupting devices when simulated fault current is applied at sensors. D. Coordinate tests with tests of generator and run them concurrently. E. Report results of tests and inspections in writing. Record adjustable relay settings and measured insulation and contact resistances and time delays. Attach a label or tag to each tested component indicating satisfactory completion of tests. F. Transfer switches will be considered defective if they do not pass tests and inspections. G. Remove and replace malfunctioning units and retest as specified above. H. Prepare test and inspection reports. I. Infrared Scanning: After Substantial Completion, but not more than 60 days after Final Acceptance, perform an infrared scan of each switch. Remove all access panels so joints and connections are accessible to portable scanner. 1. Instrument: Use an infrared scanning device designed to measure temperature or to detect significant deviations from normal values. Provide calibration record for device. 2. Record of Infrared Scanning: Prepare a certified report that identifies switches checked and that describes scanning results. Include notation of deficiencies detected, remedial action taken, and observations after remedial action. 3. Follow-up Infrared Scanning: Perform an additional follow-up infrared scan of each switch 11 months after date of Substantial Completion. 3.4 DEMONSTRATION A. Train Owner's maintenance personnel to adjust, operate, and maintain transfer switches and related equipment. B. Training shall include testing ground-fault protective devices and instructions to determine when the ground-fault system shall be retested. Include instructions on where ground-fault sensors are located and how to avoid negating the ground-fault protection scheme during testing and circuit modifications. C. Coordinate this training with that for generator equipment. END OF SECTION SECTION 26 41 13 LIGHTNING PROTECTION FOR STRUCTURES PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Section includes lightning protection system for ordinary structures. 1.3 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For each type of product. B. Shop Drawings: 1. Include layouts of the lightning protection system, with details of the components to be used in the installation. 2. Include raceway locations needed for the installation of conductors. 3. Details of air terminals, ground rods, ground rings, conductor supports, splices, and terminations, including concealment requirements. 4. Include roof attachment details, coordinated with roof installation. 5. Calculations required by NFPA 780 for bonding of metal bodies. 1.4 INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS A. Coordination Drawings: Lightning protection system Shop Drawings, drawn to scale, on which the following items are shown and coordinated with each other, using input from installers of the items involved: 1. Lightning protection cabling attachments to roofing systems and accessories. 2. Lightning protection strike termination device attachment to roofing systems, coordinated with the roofing system manufacturer. 3. Lightning protection system components penetrating roofing and moisture protection systems and system components, coordinated with the roofing system manufacturer. B. Qualification Data: For Installer. C. Product Certificates: For each type of roof adhesive for attaching the roof-mounted air terminal assemblies, approved by the roofing-material manufacturer. D. Field quality-control reports. 1.5 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Maintenance Data: For lightning protection system to include in maintenance manuals. 1. In addition to items specified in Section 01 78 23 "Operation and Maintenance Data," include the following: a. Dimensioned site plan showing dimensioned route of the ground loop conductor and the ground rod locations. Comply with requirements of Section 01 78 39 "Project Record Documents." b. A system testing and inspection record, listing the results of inspections and ground resistance tests, as recommended by NFPA 780, Annex D. B. Completion Certificate: 1. UL Master Label Certificate. 1.6 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Installer Qualifications: UL-listed installer, category OWAY. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 MANUFACTURERS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. Heary Bros. Lightning Protection Co. Inc. 2. National Lightning Protection. 3. Thompson Lightning Protection, Inc. 2.2 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. UL Lightning Protection Standard: Comply with UL 96A requirements for Class II buildings. B. Lightning Protection Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled by a qualified testing agency as complying with UL 96, and marked for intended location and application. 2.3 MATERIALS A. Air Terminals: 1. Aluminum unless otherwise indicated. 2. 1/2-inch (12.7-mm) diameter by 15 inches (380 mm) long. 3. Pointed tip. 4. Threaded base support. B. Class II Main Conductors: 1. Aluminum: 192,000 circular mils in diameter. C. Secondary Conductors: 1. Aluminum: 41,400 circular mils in diameter. D. Ground Loop Conductor: Stranded copper. E. Ground Rods: 1. Material: Copper-clad steel. 2. Diameter: 3/4 inch (19 mm). 3. Rods shall be not less than 120 inches (3050 mm) long. F. Conductor Splices and Connectors: Compression fittings that are installed with hydraulically operated tools, or exothermic welds, approved for use with the class type. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 INSTALLATION A. Install lightning protection components and systems according to UL 96A. B. Install conductors with direct paths from air terminals to ground connections. Avoid bends less than 90 degrees and 8 inches (203 mm) in radius and narrow loops. C. Conceal conductors within normal view from exterior locations at grade within 200 feet (60 m) of building. Comply with requirements for concealed installations in UL 96A. 1. Roof penetrations required for down conductors and connections to structural-steel framework shall be made using listed through-roof fitting and connector assemblies with solid rods and appropriate roof flashings. Use materials approved by the roofing manufacturer for the purpose. Conform to the methods and materials required at roofing penetrations of the lightning protection components to ensure compatibility with the roofing specifications and warranty. 2. Install conduit where necessary to comply with conductor concealment requirements. 3. Air Terminals on Single-Ply Membrane Roofing: Comply with adhesive manufacturer's written instructions. D. Ground Ring Electrode: The conductor shall be not less than the main-size lightning conductor. 3.2 CONNECTIONS A. Aboveground concealed connections, and connections in earth or concrete, shall be done by exothermic welds or by high-compression fittings listed for the purpose. B. Aboveground exposed connections shall be done using the following types of connectors, listed and labeled for the purpose: exothermic weld. C. Bonding Straps and Jumpers: Install in locations accessible for inspection and maintenance, except where routed through short lengths of conduit. 1. Bonding to Structure: Bond straps directly to basic structure, taking care not to penetrate any adjacent parts. 2. Bonding to Equipment Mounted on Vibration Isolation Hangers and Supports: Install bonding so vibration is not transmitted to rigidly mounted equipment. 3.3 CORROSION PROTECTION A. Do not combine materials that can form an electrolytic couple that will accelerate corrosion in the presence of moisture unless moisture is permanently excluded from junction of such materials. B. Use conductors with protective coatings where conditions would cause deterioration or corrosion of conductors. 3.4 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Special Inspections: Engage a qualified special inspector to perform the following special inspections: 1. Perform inspections as required to obtain a UL Master Label for system. B. Prepare test and inspection reports and certificates. END OF SECTION SECTION 26 43 13 SURGE PROTECTION FOR LOW-VOLTAGE ELECTRICAL POWER CIRCUITS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Section includes field-mounted SPDs for low-voltage (120 to 600 V) power distribution and control equipment. B. Related Requirements: 1. Section 26 24 13 "Switchboards" for factory-installed SPDs. 2. Section 26 24 16 "Panelboards" for factory-installed SPDs. 1.3 DEFINITIONS A. Inominal: Nominal discharge current. B. MCOV: Maximum continuous operating voltage. C. Mode(s), also Modes of Protection: The pair of electrical connections where the VPR applies. D. MOV: Metal-oxide varistor; an electronic component with a significant non-ohmic current-voltage characteristic. E. OCPD: Overcurrent protective device. F. SCCR: Short-circuit current rating. G. SPD: Surge protective device. H. VPR: Voltage protection rating. 1.4 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For each type of product. 1. Include rated capacities, operating characteristics, electrical characteristics, and furnished specialties and accessories. 2. Copy of UL Category Code VZCA certification, as a minimum, listing the tested values for VPRs, Inominal ratings, MCOVs, type designations, OCPD requirements, model numbers, system voltages, and modes of protection. 1.5 INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS A. Field quality-control reports. B. Sample Warranty: For manufacturer's special warranty. 1.6 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Maintenance Data: For SPDs to include in maintenance manuals. 1.7 WARRANTY A. Manufacturer's Warranty: Manufacturer agrees to replace or replace SPDs that fail in materials or workmanship within specified warranty period. 1. Warranty Period: Five years from date of Substantial Completion. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 GENERAL SPD REQUIREMENTS A. SPD with Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. B. Comply with NFPA 70. C. Comply with UL 1449. D. MCOV of the SPD shall be the nominal system voltage. 2.2 SERVICE ENTRANCE SUPPRESSOR A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. ABB France. 2. Advanced Protection Technologies Inc. (APT). 3. Eaton Corporation. 4. Emerson Electric Co. 5. GE Zenith Controls. 6. LEA International; Protection Technology Group. 7. Leviton Manufacturing Co., Inc. 8. PowerLogics, Inc. 9. Schneider Electric Industries SAS. 10. Siemens Industry, Inc. B. SPDs: Comply with UL 1449, Type 1. C. SPDs: Listed and labeled by an NRTL acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction as complying with UL 1449, Type 1 1. SPDs with the following features and accessories: a. Integral disconnect switch. b. Internal thermal protection that disconnects the SPD before damaging internal suppressor components. c. Indicator light display for protection status. d. Form-C contacts rated at 5 A and 250-V ac, one normally open and one normally closed, for remote monitoring of protection status. e. Surge counter. D. Comply with UL 1283. E. Peak Surge Current Rating: The minimum single-pulse surge current withstand rating per phase shall not be less than 200 kA. The peak surge current rating shall be the arithmetic sum of the ratings of the individual MOVs in a given mode. F. Protection modes and UL 1449 VPR for grounded wye circuits with 480Y/277 V or 208Y/120 V, three-phase, four-wire circuits shall not exceed the following: 1. Line to Neutral: 1200 V for 480Y/277 V or 700 V for 208Y/120 V. 2. Line to Ground: 1200 V for 480Y/277 V or 1200 V for 208Y/120 V. 3. Line to Line: 2000 V for 480Y/277 V or 1000 V for 208Y/120 V. G. Protection modes and UL 1449 VPR for 240/120 V, single-phase, three-wire circuits shall not exceed the following: 1. Line to Neutral: 700 V. 2. Line to Ground: 700 V. 3. Line to Line: 1000 V. H. SCCR: Equal or exceed 200 kA. I. Inominal Rating: 20 kA. 2.3 PANEL SUPPRESSORS A. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following: 1. ABB France. 2. Advanced Protection Technologies Inc. (APT). 3. Eaton Corporation. 4. Emerson Electric Co. 5. GE Zenith Controls. 6. LEA International; Protection Technology Group. 7. Leviton Manufacturing Co., Inc. 8. PowerLogics, Inc. 9. Schneider Electric Industries SAS. 10. Siemens Industry, Inc. B. SPDs: Comply with UL 1449, Type 2. 1. Include LED indicator lights for power and protection status. 2. Internal thermal protection that disconnects the SPD before damaging internal suppressor components. 3. Include Form-C contacts rated at 5 A and 250-V ac, one normally open and one normally closed, for remote monitoring of protection status. C. Peak Surge Current Rating: The minimum single-pulse surge current withstand rating per phase shall not be less than 100 kA. The peak surge current rating shall be the arithmetic sum of the ratings of the individual MOVs in a given mode. D. Comply with UL 1283. E. Protection modes and UL 1449 VPR for grounded wye circuits with 480Y/277 V or 208Y/120 V, three-phase, four-wire circuits shall not exceed the following: 1. Line to Neutral: 1200 V for 480Y/277 V or 700 V for 208Y/120 V. 2. Line to Ground: 1200 V for 480Y/277 V or 700 V for 208Y/120 V. 3. Neutral to Ground: 1200 V for 480Y/277 V or 700 V for 208Y/120 V. 4. Line to Line: 2000 V for 480Y/277 V or 1200 V for 208Y/120 V. F. Protection modes and UL 1449 VPR for 240/120-V, single-phase, three-wire circuits shall not exceed the following: 1. Line to Neutral: 700 V. 2. Line to Ground: 700 V. 3. Neutral to Ground: 700 V. 4. Line to Line: 1200 V. G. SCCR: Equal or exceed 200 kA. H. Inominal Rating: 20 kA. 2.4 ENCLOSURES A. Indoor Enclosures: NEMA 250, Type 1. B. Outdoor Enclosures: NEMA 250, Type 3R. 2.5 CONDUCTORS AND CABLES A. Power Wiring: Same size as SPD leads, complying with Section 26 05 19 "Low-Voltage Electrical Power Conductors and Cables." B. Class 2 Control Cables: Multiconductor cable with copper conductors not smaller than No. 18 AWG, complying with Section 26 05 19 "Low-Voltage Electrical Power Conductors and Cables." C. Class 1 Control Cables: Multiconductor cable with copper conductors not smaller than No. 14 AWG, complying with Section 26 05 19 "Low-Voltage Electrical Power Conductors and Cables." QTS FTW1 DC1 EXPANSION  21407.0200  ISSUE FOR PERMIT  MARCH 28, 2025  PART 3 -EXECUTION  3.1 INSTALLATION A. Comply with NECA 1. B. Install an OCPD or disconnect as required to comply with the UL listing of the SPD. C. Install SPDs with conductors between suppressor and points of attachment as short and straight as possible, and adjust circuit-breaker positions to achieve shortest and straightest leads. Do not splice and extend SPD leads unless specifically permitted by manufacturer. Do not exceed manufacturer's recommended lead length. Do not bond neutral and ground. D. Use crimped connectors and splices only. Wire nuts are unacceptable. E. Wiring: 1. Power Wiring: Comply with wiring methods in Section 26 05 19 "Low-Voltage Electrical Power Conductors and Cables." 2. Controls: Comply with wiring methods in Section 26 05 19 "Low-Voltage Electrical Power Conductors and Cables." 3.2 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Perform the following tests and inspections with the assistance of a factory-authorized service representative. 1. Compare equipment nameplate data for compliance with Drawings and Specifications. 2. Inspect anchorage, alignment, grounding, and clearances. 3. Verify that electrical wiring installation complies with manufacturer's written installation requirements. B. An SPD will be considered defective if it does not pass tests and inspections. C. Prepare test and inspection reports. 3.3 STARTUP SERVICE A. Complete startup checks according to manufacturer's written instructions. B. Do not perform insulation-resistance tests of the distribution wiring equipment with SPDs installed. Disconnect SPDs before conducting insulation-resistance tests, and reconnect them immediately after the testing is over. C. Energize SPDs after power system has been energized, stabilized, and tested. 3.4 DEMONSTRATION A. Train Owner's maintenance personnel to operate and maintain SPDs. END OF SECTION SECTION 26 51 00 INTERIOR LIGHTING PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Section Includes: 1. Interior lighting fixtures, lamps, and ballasts. 2. Emergency lighting units. 3. Exit signs. 4. Lighting fixture supports. 5. Retrofit kits for fluorescent lighting fixtures. B. Related Sections: 1. Section 26 09 23 "Lighting Control Devices" for automatic control of lighting, including time switches, photoelectric relays, occupancy sensors, and multipole lighting relays and contactors. 2. Section 26 27 26 "Wiring Devices" for manual wall-box dimmers for incandescent lamps. 1.3 DEFINITIONS A. BF: Ballast factor. B. CCT: Correlated Color Temperature. C. CRI: Color-Rendering Index. D. HID: High-Intensity Discharge. E. LER: Luminaire Efficacy Rating. F. Lumen: Measured output of lamp and luminaire, or both. G. Luminaire: Complete lighting fixture, including ballast housing if provided. 1.4 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For each type of lighting fixture, arranged in order of fixture designation. Include data on features, accessories, finishes, and the following: 1. Physical description of lighting fixture including dimensions. 2. Emergency lighting units including battery and charger. 3. Ballast, including BF. 4. Energy-efficiency data. 5. Air and Thermal Performance Data: For air-handling lighting fixtures. Furnish data required in "Action Submittals" Article in Section 23 37 13 "Diffusers, Registers, and Grilles." 6. Sound Performance Data: For air-handling lighting fixtures. Indicate sound power level and sound transmission class in test reports certified according to standards specified in Section 23 37 13 "Diffusers, Registers, and Grilles." 7. Life, output (lumens, CCT, and CRI), and energy-efficiency data for lamps. 8. Photometric data and adjustment factors based on laboratory tests, complying with IESNA Lighting Measurements Testing & Calculation Guides, of each lighting fixture type. The adjustment factors shall be for lamps, ballasts, and accessories identical to those indicated for the lighting fixture as applied in this Project. a. Testing Agency Certified Data: For indicated fixtures, photometric data shall be certified by a qualified independent testing agency. Photometric data for remaining fixtures shall be certified by manufacturer. b. Manufacturer Certified Data: Photometric data shall be certified by a manufacturer's laboratory with a current accreditation under the National Voluntary Laboratory Accreditation Program for Energy Efficient Lighting Products. B. Shop Drawings: For nonstandard or custom lighting fixtures. Include plans, elevations, sections, details, and attachments to other work. 1. Detail equipment assemblies and indicate dimensions, weights, loads, required clearances, method of field assembly, components, and location and size of each field connection. 2. Wiring Diagrams: For power, signal, and control wiring. C. Samples: For each lighting fixture indicated in the Interior Lighting Fixture Schedule. Each Sample shall include the following: 1. Lamps and ballasts, installed. 2. Cords and plugs. 3. Pendant support system. D. Installation instructions. 1.5 INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS A. Coordination Drawings: Reflected ceiling plan(s) and other details, drawn to scale, on which the following items are shown and coordinated with each other, using input from installers of the items involved: 1. Lighting fixtures. 2. Suspended ceiling components. 3. Partitions and millwork that penetrate the ceiling or extends to within 12 inches (305 mm) of the plane of the luminaires. 4. Ceiling-mounted projectors. 5. Structural members to which suspension systems for lighting fixtures will be attached. 6. Other items in finished ceiling including the following: a. Air outlets and inlets. b. Speakers. c. Sprinklers. d. Smoke and fire detectors. e. Occupancy sensors. f. Access panels. 7. Perimeter moldings. B. Qualification Data: For qualified agencies providing photometric data for lighting fixtures. C. Product Certificates: For each type of ballast for bi-level and dimmer-controlled fixtures, from manufacturer. D. Field quality-control reports. E. Warranty: Sample of special warranty. 1.6 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Operation and Maintenance Data: For lighting equipment and fixtures to include in emergency, operation, and maintenance manuals. 1. Provide a list of all lamp types used on Project; use ANSI and manufacturers' codes. 1.7 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Luminaire Photometric Data Testing Laboratory Qualifications: Provided by manufacturers' laboratories that are accredited under the National Volunteer Laboratory Accreditation Program for Energy Efficient Lighting Products. B. Luminaire Photometric Data Testing Laboratory Qualifications: Provided by an independent agency, with the experience and capability to conduct the testing indicated, that is an NRTL as defined by OSHA in 29 CFR 1910, complying with the IESNA Lighting Measurements Testing & Calculation Guides. C. Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories: Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application. D. Comply with NFPA 70. E. FM Global Compliance: Lighting fixtures for hazardous locations shall be listed and labeled for indicated class and division of hazard by FM Global. 1.8 COORDINATION A. Coordinate layout and installation of lighting fixtures and suspension system with other construction that penetrates ceilings or is supported by them, including HVAC equipment, fire-suppression system, and partition assemblies. 1.9 WARRANTY A. Special Warranty for Emergency Lighting Batteries: Manufacturer's standard form in which manufacturer of battery-powered emergency lighting unit agrees to repair or replace components of rechargeable batteries that fail in materials or workmanship within specified warranty period. 1. Warranty Period for Emergency Lighting Unit Batteries: 10 years from date of Substantial Completion. Full warranty shall apply for first year, and prorated warranty for the remaining nine years. 2. Warranty Period for Emergency Fluorescent Ballast and Self-Powered Exit Sign Batteries: Seven years from date of Substantial Completion. Full warranty shall apply for first year, and prorated warranty for the remaining six years. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 MANUFACTURERS A. Products: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide product indicated on Drawings. 2.2 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR LIGHTING FIXTURES AND COMPONENTS A. Recessed Fixtures: Comply with NEMA LE 4 for ceiling compatibility for recessed fixtures. B. Fluorescent Fixtures: Comply with UL 1598. Where LER is specified, test according to NEMA LE 5 and NEMA LE 5A as applicable. C. HID Fixtures: Comply with UL 1598. Where LER is specified, test according to NEMA LE 5B. D. Metal Parts: Free of burrs and sharp corners and edges. E. Sheet Metal Components: Steel unless otherwise indicated. Form and support to prevent warping and sagging. F. Doors, Frames, and Other Internal Access: Smooth operating, free of light leakage under operating conditions, and designed to permit relamping without use of tools. Designed to prevent doors, frames, lenses, diffusers, and other components from falling accidentally during relamping and when secured in operating position. G. Diffusers and Globes: 1. Acrylic Lighting Diffusers: 100 percent virgin acrylic plastic. High resistance to yellowing and other changes due to aging, exposure to heat, and UV radiation. a. Lens Thickness: At least 0.125 inch (3.175 mm) minimum unless otherwise indicated. b. UV stabilized. 2. Glass: Annealed crystal glass unless otherwise indicated. H. Factory-Applied Labels: Comply with UL 1598. Include recommended lamps and ballasts. Labels shall be located where they will be readily visible to service personnel, but not seen from normal viewing angles when lamps are in place. 1. Label shall include the following lamp and ballast characteristics: a. "USE ONLY" and include specific lamp type. b. Lamp diameter code (T-5, T-8, etc.), tube configuration (twin, quad, triple, etc.), base type, and nominal wattage for fluorescent and compact fluorescent luminaires. c. Lamp type, wattage, bulb type (ED17, BD56, etc.) and coating (clear or coated) for HID luminaires. d. Start type (preheat, rapid start, instant start, etc.) for fluorescent and compact fluorescent luminaires. e. ANSI ballast type (M98, M57, etc.) for HID luminaires. f. CCT and CRI for all luminaires. I. Electromagnetic-Interference Filters: Factory installed to suppress conducted electromagnetic interference as required by MIL-STD-461E. Fabricate lighting fixtures with one filter on each ballast indicated to require a filter. J. Air-Handling Fluorescent Fixtures: For use with plenum ceiling for air return and heat extraction and for attaching an air-diffuser-boot assembly specified in Section 23 37 13 "Diffusers, Registers, and Grilles." 1. Air-Supply Units: Slots in one or both side trims join with air-diffuser-boot assemblies. 2. Heat-Removal Units: Air path leads through lamp cavity. 3. Combination Heat-Removal and Air-Supply Unit: Heat is removed through lamp cavity at both ends of the fixture door with air supply same as for air-supply units. 4. Dampers: Operable from outside fixture for control of return-air volume. 5. Static Fixture: Air-supply slots are blanked off, and fixture appearance matches active units. 2.3 BALLASTS FOR LINEAR FLUORESCENT LAMPS A. General Requirements for Electronic Ballasts: 1. Comply with UL 935 and with ANSI C82.11. 2. Designed for type and quantity of lamps served. 3. Ballasts shall be designed for full light output unless another BF, dimmer, or bi-level control is indicated. 4. Sound Rating: Class A. 5. Total Harmonic Distortion Rating: Less than 10 percent. 6. Transient Voltage Protection: IEEE C62.41.1 and IEEE C62.41.2, Category A or better. 7. Operating Frequency: 42 kHz or higher. 8. Lamp Current Crest Factor: 1.7 or less. 9. BF: 0.88 or higher. 10. Power Factor: 0.95 or higher. 11. Parallel Lamp Circuits: Multiple lamp ballasts shall comply with ANSI C82.11 and shall be connected to maintain full light output on surviving lamps if one or more lamps fail. B. Luminaires controlled by occupancy sensors shall have programmed-start ballasts. C. Electronic Programmed-Start Ballasts for T5, T8, T5HO Lamps: Comply with ANSI C82.11 and the following: 1. Lamp end-of-life detection and shutdown circuit for T5 diameter lamps. 2. Automatic lamp starting after lamp replacement. D. Electromagnetic Ballasts: Comply with ANSI C82.1; energy saving, high-power factor, Class P, and having automatic-reset thermal protection. 1. Ballast Manufacturer Certification: Indicated by label. E. Single Ballasts for Multiple Lighting Fixtures: Factory wired with ballast arrangements and bundled extension wiring to suit final installation conditions without modification or rewiring in the field. F. Ballasts for Low-Temperature Environments: 1. Temperatures 0 Deg F (Minus 17 Deg C) and Higher: Electronic type rated for 0 deg F (minus 17 deg C) starting and operating temperature with indicated lamp types. 2. Temperatures Minus 20 Deg F (Minus 29 Deg C) and Higher: Electromagnetic type designed for use with indicated lamp types. G. Ballasts for Residential Applications: Fixtures designated as "Residential" may use low-power-factor electronic ballasts having a Class B sound rating and total harmonic distortion of approximately 30 percent. H. Ballasts for Low Electromagnetic-Interference Environments: Comply with 47 CFR 18, Ch. 1, Subpart C, for limitations on electromagnetic and radio-frequency interference for consumer equipment. I. Ballasts for Dimmer-Controlled Lighting Fixtures: Electronic type. 1. Dimming Range: 100 to 5 percent of rated lamp lumens. 2. Ballast Input Watts: Can be reduced to 20 percent of normal. 3. Compatibility: Certified by manufacturer for use with specific dimming control system and lamp type indicated. 4. Control: Coordinate wiring from ballast to control device to ensure that the ballast, controller, and connecting wiring are compatible. J. Ballasts for Bi-Level Controlled Lighting Fixtures: Electronic type. 1. Operating Modes: Ballast circuit and leads provide for remote control of the light output of the associated lamp between high-and low-level and off. a. High-Level Operation: 100 percent of rated lamp lumens. b. Low-Level Operation: 30 percent of rated lamp lumens. 2. Ballast shall provide equal current to each lamp in each operating mode. 3. Compatibility: Certified by manufacturer for use with specific bi-level control system and lamp type indicated. K. Ballasts for Tri-Level Controlled Lighting Fixtures: Electronic type. 1. Operating Modes: Ballast circuit and leads provide for remote control of the light output of the associated lamp between high-and low-level and off. a. High-Level Operation: 100 percent of rated lamp lumens. b. Low-Level Operation: 30 and 50 percent of rated lamp lumens. 2. Ballast shall provide equal current to each lamp in each operating mode. 3. Compatibility: Certified by manufacturer for use with specific tri-level control system and lamp type indicated. 2.4 BALLASTS FOR COMPACT FLUORESCENT LAMPS A. Description: Electronic-programmed rapid-start type, complying with UL 935 and with ANSI C 82.11, designed for type and quantity of lamps indicated. Ballast shall be designed for full light output unless dimmer or bi-level control is indicated: 1. Lamp end-of-life detection and shutdown circuit. 2. Automatic lamp starting after lamp replacement. 3. Sound Rating: Class A. 4. Total Harmonic Distortion Rating: Less than 20 percent. 5. Transient Voltage Protection: IEEE C62.41.1 and IEEE C62.41.2, Category A or better. 6. Operating Frequency: 20 kHz or higher. 7. Lamp Current Crest Factor: 1.7 or less. 8. BF: 0.95 or higher unless otherwise indicated. 9. Power Factor: 0.95 or higher. 10. Interference: Comply with 47 CFR 18, Ch. 1, Subpart C, for limitations on electromagnetic and radio-frequency interference for nonconsumer equipment. 2.5 EMERGENCY FLUORESCENT POWER UNIT A. Internal Type: Self-contained, modular, battery-inverter unit, factory mounted within lighting fixture body and compatible with ballast. Comply with UL 924. 1. Emergency Connection: Operate one fluorescent lamp(s) continuously at an output of 1100 lumens each. Connect unswitched circuit to battery-inverter unit and switched circuit to fixture ballast. 2. Nightlight Connection: Operate one fluorescent lamp continuously. 3. Test Push Button and Indicator Light: Visible and accessible without opening fixture or entering ceiling space. a. Push Button: Push-to-test type, in unit housing, simulates loss of normal power and demonstrates unit operability. b. Indicator Light: LED indicates normal power on. Normal glow indicates trickle charge; bright glow indicates charging at end of discharge cycle. 4. Battery: Sealed, maintenance-free, nickel-cadmium type. 5. Charger: Fully automatic, solid-state, constant-current type with sealed power transfer relay. 6. Remote Test: Switch in hand-held remote device aimed in direction of tested unit initiates coded infrared signal. Signal reception by factory-installed infrared receiver in tested unit triggers simulation of loss of its normal power supply, providing visual confirmation of either proper or failed emergency response. 7. Integral Self-Test: Factory-installed electronic device automatically initiates code-required test of unit emergency operation at required intervals. Test failure is annunciated by an integral audible alarm and a flashing red LED. B. External Type: Self-contained, modular, battery-inverter unit, suitable for powering one or more fluorescent lamps, remote mounted from lighting fixture. Comply with UL 924. 1. Emergency Connection: Operate one fluorescent lamp continuously. Connect unswitched circuit to battery-inverter unit and switched circuit to fixture ballast. 2. Nightlight Connection: Operate one fluorescent lamp in a remote fixture continuously. 3. Battery: Sealed, maintenance-free, nickel-cadmium type. 4. Charger: Fully automatic, solid-state, constant-current type. 5. Housing: NEMA 250, Type 1 enclosure. 6. Test Push Button: Push-to-test type, in unit housing, simulates loss of normal power and demonstrates unit operability. 7. LED Indicator Light: Indicates normal power on. Normal glow indicates trickle charge; bright glow indicates charging at end of discharge cycle. 8. Remote Test: Switch in hand-held remote device aimed in direction of tested unit initiates coded infrared signal. Signal reception by factory-installed infrared receiver in tested unit triggers simulation of loss of its normal power supply, providing visual confirmation of either proper or failed emergency response. 9. Integral Self-Test: Factory-installed electronic device automatically initiates code-required test of unit emergency operation at required intervals. Test failure is annunciated by an integral audible alarm and a flashing red LED. 2.6 BALLASTS FOR HID LAMPS A. Electromagnetic Ballast for Metal-Halide Lamps: Comply with ANSI C82.4 and UL 1029. Include the following features unless otherwise indicated: 1. Ballast Circuit: Constant-wattage autotransformer or regulating high-power.factor type. 2. Minimum Starting Temperature: Minus 22 deg F (Minus 30 deg C) for single-lamp ballasts. 3. Rated Ambient Operating Temperature: 104 deg F (40 deg C). 4. Open-circuit operation that will not reduce average life. 5. Low-Noise Ballasts: Manufacturers' standard epoxy-encapsulated models designed to minimize audible fixture noise. B. Electronic Ballast for Metal-Halide Lamps: Include the following features unless otherwise indicated: 1. Minimum Starting Temperature: Minus 20 deg F (Minus 29 deg C) for single-lamp ballasts. 2. Rated Ambient Operating Temperature: 130 deg F (54 deg C). 3. Lamp end-of-life detection and shutdown circuit. 4. Sound Rating: Class A. 5. Total Harmonic Distortion Rating: Less than 20 percent. 6. Transient Voltage Protection: IEEE C62.41.1 and IEEE C62.41.2, Category A or better. 7. Lamp Current Crest Factor: 1.5 or less. 8. Power Factor: 0.90 or higher. 9. Interference: Comply with 47 CFR 18, Ch. 1, Subpart C, for limitations on electromagnetic and radio-frequency interference for nonconsumer equipment. 10. Protection: Class P thermal cutout. 11. Bi-Level Dimming Ballast: Ballast circuit and leads provide for remote control of the light output of the associated fixture between high-and low-level and off. a. High-Level Operation: 100 percent of rated lamp lumens. b. Low-Level Operation: 50 percent of rated lamp lumens. c. Compatibility: Certified by ballast manufacturer for use with specific bi-level control system and lamp type indicated. Certified by lamp manufacturer that ballast operating modes are free from negative effect on lamp life and color-rendering capability. 12. Continuous Dimming Ballast: Dimming range shall be from 100 to 35 percent of rated lamp lumens without flicker. a. Ballast Input Watts: Reduced to a maximum of 50 percent of normal at lowest dimming setting. 2.7 QUARTZ LAMP LIGHTING CONTROLLER A. General Requirements for Controllers: Factory installed by lighting fixture manufacturer. Comply with UL 1598. B. Standby (Quartz Restrike): Automatically switches quartz lamp on when a HID lamp in the fixture is initially energized and during the HID lamp restrike period after brief power outages. C. Connections: Designed for a single branch -circuit connection. D. Switching Off: Automatically switches quartz lamp off when HID lamp strikes. E. Switching Off: Automatically switches quartz lamp off when HID lamp reaches approximately 60 percent light output. 2.8 EXIT SIGNS A. General Requirements for Exit Signs: Comply with UL 924; for sign colors, visibility, luminance, and lettering size, comply with authorities having jurisdiction. B. Internally Lighted Signs: 1. Lamps for AC Operation: Fluorescent, two for each fixture, 20,000 hours of rated lamp life. 2. Lamps for AC Operation: LEDs, 50,000 hours minimum rated lamp life. 3. Self-Powered Exit Signs (Battery Type): Integral automatic charger in a self-contained power pack. a. Battery: Sealed, maintenance-free, nickel-cadmium type. b. Charger: Fully automatic, solid-state type with sealed transfer relay. c. Operation: Relay automatically energizes lamp from battery when circuit voltage drops to 80 percent of nominal voltage or below. When normal voltage is restored, relay disconnects lamps from battery, and battery is automatically recharged and floated on charger. d. Test Push Button: Push-to-test type, in unit housing, simulates loss of normal power and demonstrates unit operability. e. LED Indicator Light: Indicates normal power on. Normal glow indicates trickle charge; bright glow indicates charging at end of discharge cycle. f. Remote Test: Switch in hand-held remote device aimed in direction of tested unit initiates coded infrared signal. Signal reception by factory-installed infrared receiver in tested unit triggers simulation of loss of its normal power supply, providing visual confirmation of either proper or failed emergency response. g. Integral Self-Test: Factory-installed electronic device automatically initiates code-required test of unit emergency operation at required intervals. Test failure is annunciated by an integral audible alarm and a flashing red LED. C. Self-Luminous Signs: Powered by tritium gas, with universal bracket for flush-ceiling, wall, or end mounting. Signs shall be guaranteed by manufacturer to maintain the minimum brightness requirements in UL 924 for 10 years. D. Self-Luminous Signs: Using strontium oxide aluminate compound to store ambient light and release the stored energy when the light is removed. Provide with universal bracket for flush-ceiling, wall, or end mounting. 2.9 EMERGENCY LIGHTING UNITS A. General Requirements for Emergency Lighting Units: Self-contained units complying with UL 924. 1. Battery: Sealed, maintenance-free, lead-acid type. 2. Charger: Fully automatic, solid-state type with sealed transfer relay. 3. Operation: Relay automatically turns lamp on when power-supply circuit voltage drops to 80 percent of nominal voltage or below. Lamp automatically disconnects from battery when voltage approaches deep-discharge level. When normal voltage is restored, relay disconnects lamps from battery, and battery is automatically recharged and floated on charger. 4. Test Push Button: Push-to-test type, in unit housing, simulates loss of normal power and demonstrates unit operability. 5. LED Indicator Light: Indicates normal power on. Normal glow indicates trickle charge; bright glow indicates charging at end of discharge cycle. 6. Wire Guard: Heavy-chrome-plated wire guard protects lamp heads or fixtures. 7. Integral Time-Delay Relay: Holds unit on for fixed interval of 15 minutes when power is restored after an outage. 8. Remote Test: Switch in hand-held remote device aimed in direction of tested unit initiates coded infrared signal. Signal reception by factory-installed infrared receiver in tested unit triggers simulation of loss of its normal power supply, providing visual confirmation of either proper or failed emergency response. 9. Integral Self-Test: Factory-installed electronic device automatically initiates code-required test of unit emergency operation at required intervals. Test failure is annunciated by an integral audible alarm and a flashing red LED. 2.10 FLUORESCENT LAMPS A. T8 rapid-start lamps, rated 32 W maximum, nominal length of 48 inches (1220 mm), 2800 initial lumens (minimum), CRI 75 (minimum), color temperature 3500 K, and average rated life 20,000 hours unless otherwise indicated. B. T8 rapid-start lamps, rated 17 W maximum, nominal length of 24 inches (610 mm), 1300 initial lumens (minimum), CRI 75 (minimum), color temperature 3500 K, and average rated life of 20,000 hours unless otherwise indicated. C. T5 rapid-start lamps, rated 28 W maximum, nominal length of 45.2 inches (1150 mm), 2900 initial lumens (minimum), CRI 85 (minimum), color temperature 3000 K, and average rated life of 20,000 hours unless otherwise indicated. D. T5HO rapid-start, high-output lamps, rated 54 W maximum, nominal length of 45.2 inches (1150 mm), 5000 initial lumens (minimum), CRI 85 (minimum), color temperature 4100 K, and average rated life of 20,000 hours unless otherwise indicated. E. Compact Fluorescent Lamps: 4-Pin, CRI 80 (minimum), color temperature 3500 K, average rated life of 10,000 hours at three hours operation per start, and suitable for use with dimming ballasts unless otherwise indicated. 1. 13 W: T4, double or triple tube, rated 900 initial lumens (minimum). 2. 18 W: T4, double or triple tube, rated 1200 initial lumens (minimum). 3. 26 W: T4, double or triple tube, rated 1800 initial lumens (minimum). 4. 32 W: T4, triple tube, rated 2400 initial lumens (minimum). 5. 42 W: T4, triple tube, rated 3200 initial lumens (minimum). 6. 57 W: T4, triple tube, rated 4300 initial lumens (minimum). 7. 70 W: T4, triple tube, rated 5200 initial lumens (minimum). 2.11 HID LAMPS A. Metal-Halide Lamps: ANSI C78.43, with minimum CRI 65, and color temperature 4000 K. B. Pulse-Start, Metal-Halide Lamps: Minimum CRI 65, and color temperature 4000 K. C. Ceramic, Pulse-Start, Metal-Halide Lamps: Minimum CRI 80, and color temperature 4000 K. D. Low-Pressure Sodium Lamps: ANSI 78.41, CRI 0, and color temperature 1800 K. 2.12 LIGHTING FIXTURE SUPPORT COMPONENTS A. Comply with Section 26 05 29 "Hangers and Supports for Electrical Systems" for channel-and angle-iron supports and nonmetallic channel and angle supports. B. Single-Stem Hangers: 1/2-inch (13-mm) steel tubing with swivel ball fittings and ceiling canopy. Finish same as fixture. C. Twin-Stem Hangers: Two, 1/2-inch (13-mm) steel tubes with single canopy designed to mount a single fixture. Finish same as fixture. D. Wires: ASTM A 641/A 641M, Class 3, soft temper, zinc-coated steel, 12 gage (2.68 mm). E. Wires for Humid Spaces: ASTM A 580/A 580M, Composition 302 or 304, annealed stainless steel, 12 gage (2.68 mm). F. Rod Hangers: 3/16-inch (5-mm) minimum diameter, cadmium-plated, threaded steel rod. G. Hook Hangers: Integrated assembly matched to fixture and line voltage and equipped with threaded attachment, cord, and locking-type plug. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 INSTALLATION A. Lighting fixtures: 1. Set level, plumb, and square with ceilings and walls unless otherwise indicated. 2. Install lamps in each luminaire. B. Temporary Lighting: If it is necessary, and approved by Architect, to use permanent luminaires for temporary lighting, install and energize the minimum number of luminaires necessary. When construction is sufficiently complete, remove the temporary luminaires, disassemble, clean thoroughly, install new lamps, and reinstall. C. Remote Mounting of Ballasts: Distance between the ballast and fixture shall not exceed that recommended by ballast manufacturer. Verify, with ballast manufacturers, maximum distance between ballast and luminaire. D. Lay-in Ceiling Lighting Fixtures Supports: Use grid as a support element. 1. Install ceiling support system rods or wires, independent of the ceiling suspension devices, for each fixture. Locate not more than 6 inches (150 mm) from lighting fixture corners. 2. Support Clips: Fasten to lighting fixtures and to ceiling grid members at or near each fixture corner with clips that are UL listed for the application. 3. Fixtures of Sizes Less Than Ceiling Grid: Install as indicated on reflected ceiling plans or center in acoustical panel, and support fixtures independently with at least two 3/4-inch (20-mm) metal channels spanning and secured to ceiling tees. 4. Install at least one independent support rod or wire from structure to a tab on lighting fixture. Wire or rod shall have breaking strength of the weight of fixture at a safety factor of 3. E. Suspended Lighting Fixture Support: 1. Pendants and Rods: Where longer than 48 inches (1200 mm), brace to limit swinging. 2. Stem-Mounted, Single-Unit Fixtures: Suspend with twin-stem hangers. 3. Continuous Rows: Use tubing or stem for wiring at one point and tubing or rod for suspension for each unit length of fixture chassis, including one at each end. 4. Do not use grid as support for pendant luminaires. Connect support wires or rods to building structure. F. Air-Handling Lighting Fixtures: Install with dampers closed and ready for adjustment. G. Connect wiring according to Section 26 05 19 "Low-Voltage Electrical Power Conductors and Cables." 3.2 IDENTIFICATION A. Install labels with panel and circuit numbers on concealed junction and outlet boxes. Comply with requirements for identification specified in Section 26 05 53 "Identification for Electrical Systems." 3.3 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Test for Emergency Lighting: Interrupt power supply to demonstrate proper operation. Verify transfer from normal power to battery and retransfer to normal. B. Verify that self-luminous exit signs are installed according to their listing and the requirements in NFPA 101. C. Prepare a written report of tests, inspections, observations, and verifications indicating and interpreting results. If adjustments are made to lighting system, retest to demonstrate compliance with standards. 3.4 STARTUP SERVICE A. Burn-in all lamps that require specific aging period to operate properly, prior to occupancy by Owner. Burn-in fluorescent and compact fluorescent lamps intended to be dimmed, for at least 100 hours at full voltage. 3.5 ADJUSTING A. Occupancy Adjustments: When requested within 12 months of date of Substantial Completion, provide on-site assistance in adjusting aimable luminaires to suit actual occupied conditions. Provide up to two visits to Project during other-than-normal occupancy hours for this purpose. Some of this work may be required after dark. 1. Adjust aimable luminaires in the presence of Architect. END OF SECTION SECTION 26 56 13 LIGHTING POLES AND STANDARDS PART 1 -GENERAL 1.1 RELATED DOCUMENTS A. Drawings and general provisions of the Contract, including General and Supplementary Conditions and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section. 1.2 SUMMARY A. Section Includes: 1. Poles and accessories for support of luminaires. 2. Luminaire-lowering devices. 1.3 DEFINITIONS A. EPA: Equivalent projected area. B. Luminaire: Complete luminaire. C. Pole: Luminaire-supporting structure, including tower used for large-area illumination. D. Standard: See "Pole." 1.4 ACTION SUBMITTALS A. Product Data: For each pole, accessory, and luminaire-supporting and -lowering device, arranged as indicated. 1. Include data on construction details, profiles, EPA, cable entrances, materials, dimensions, weight, rated design load, and ultimate strength of individual components. 2. Include finishes for lighting poles and luminaire-supporting devices. 3. Anchor bolts. 4. Manufactured pole foundations. B. Shop Drawings: 1. Include plans, elevations, sections, and mounting and attachment details.Include details of equipment assemblies. Indicate dimensions, weights, loads, required clearances, method of field assembly, components, and location and size of each field connection. 2. Detail fabrication and assembly of poles and pole accessories. 3. Foundation construction details, including material descriptions, dimensions, anchor bolts, support devices, and calculations, signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the state of installation. 4. Anchor bolt templates keyed to specific poles and certified by manufacturer. 5. Method and procedure of pole installation. Include manufacturer's written installations. C. Samples: For each exposed lighting pole, standard, and luminaire-supporting device and for each color and texture specified. 1.5 INFORMATIONAL SUBMITTALS A. Pole and Support Component Certificates: Signed by manufacturers of poles, certifying that products are designed for indicated load requirements according to AASHTO LTS-6.M and that load imposed by luminaire and attachments has been included in design. The certification shall be based on design calculations signed and sealed by a professional engineer. B. Qualification Data: For Installer and testing agency. C. Material Test Reports: 1. For each foundation component, by a qualified testing agency. 2. For each pole, by a qualified testing agency. D. Source quality-control reports. E. Field quality-control reports. F. Sample Warranty: Manufacturer's standard warranty. G. Soil test reports 1.6 CLOSEOUT SUBMITTALS A. Operation and Maintenance Data: For poles and luminaire-lowering devices to include in emergency, operation, and maintenance manuals. 1. In addition to items specified in Section 01 78 23 "Operation and Maintenance Data," include pole inspection and repair procedures. 1.7 MAINTENANCE MATERIAL SUBMITTALS A. Pole repair materials. 1.8 QUALITY ASSURANCE A. Testing Agency Qualifications: Qualified according to ASTM C 1093 for foundation testing. 1.9 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING A. Package aluminum poles for shipping according to ASTM B 660. B. Store poles on decay-resistant skids at least 12 inches above grade and vegetation. Support poles to prevent distortion and arrange to provide free air circulation. C. Handle wood poles so they will not be damaged. Do not use pointed tools that can indent pole surface more than 1/4 inch deep. Do not apply tools to section of pole to be installed below finished grade. D. Retain factory-applied pole wrappings on fiberglass and laminated wood poles until right before pole installation. Handle poles with web fabric straps. E. Retain factory-applied pole wrappings on metal poles until right before pole installation. Handle poles with web fabric straps. 1.10 WARRANTY A. Special Warranty: Manufacturer agrees to repair or replace components of pole(s) and luminaire-lowering device(s) that fail in materials or workmanship; that corrode; or that fade, stain, perforate, erode, or chalk due to effects of weather or solar radiation within a specified warranty period. Manufacturer may exclude lightning damage, hail damage, vandalism, abuse, or unauthorized repairs from special warranty period. 1. Warranty Period: Five years from date of Substantial Completion. 2. Warranty Period for Corrosion Resistance: Fifteen years from date of Substantial Completion. 3. Warranty Period for Color Retention: Ten years from date of Substantial Completion. PART 2 -PRODUCTS 2.1 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS A. Delegated Design: Engage a qualified professional engineer, as defined in Section 01 40 00 "Quality Requirements," to design pole foundation and pole power system. B. Structural Characteristics: Comply with AASHTO LTS-6-M. C. Dead Load: Weight of luminaire and its horizontal and vertical supports, lowering devices, and supporting structure, applied according to AASHTO LTS-6-M. Live Load: Single load of 500 lbf distributed according to AASHTO LTS-6-M. D. Ice Load: Load of 3 lbf/sq. ft., applied according to AASHTO LTS-6-M for applicable areas on the Ice Load Map. E. Wind Load: Pressure of wind on pole and luminaire, calculated and applied according to AASHTO LTS-6-M. 1. Basic wind speed for calculating wind load for poles exceeding 50 feet in height is 100 mph. a. Wind Importance Factor: 1.0. b. Minimum Design Life: 50 years. c. Velocity Conversion Factor: 1.0. 2. Basic wind speed for calculating wind load for poles 50 feet high or less is 100 mph. a. Wind Importance Factor: 1.0. b. Minimum Design Life: 25 years. c. Velocity Conversion Factor: 1.0. F. Strength Analysis: For each pole, multiply the actual EPA of luminaires and brackets by a factor of 1.1 to obtain the EPA to be used in pole selection strength analysis. G. Luminaire Attachment Provisions: Comply with luminaire manufacturers' mounting requirements. Use stainless-steel fasteners and mounting bolts unless otherwise indicated. 2.2 STEEL POLES A. Source Limitations: Obtain poles from single manufacturer or producer. B. Source Limitations: For poles, obtain each color, grade, finish, type, and variety of pole from single source with resources to provide products of consistent quality in appearance and physical properties. C. Poles: Comply with ASTM A 500/A 500M, Grade B carbon steel with a minimum yield of 46,000 psig; one-piece construction up to 40 feet in height with access handhole in pole wall. 1. Shape: As shown on drawings.Mounting Provisions: Butt flange for bolted mounting on foundation or breakaway support. D. Poles: Comply with ASTM A 240/A 240M, stainless steel with a minimum yield of 55,000 psig; one-piece construction up to 40 feet in height with access handhole in pole wall. 1. Shape: As shown on drawings. E. Mounting Provisions: Butt flange for bolted mounting on foundation or breakaway support.Steel Mast Arms: Single-arm, Truss, or Davit type, continuously welded to pole attachment plate. Material and finish same as plate. F. Brackets for Luminaires: Detachable, cantilever, without underbrace. 1. Adaptor fitting welded to pole, allowing the bracket to be bolted to the pole-mounted adapter, then bolted together with galvanized-steel bolts. 2. Cross Section: Tapered oval, with straight tubular end section to accommodate luminaire. Match pole material and finish. G. Pole-Top Tenons: Fabricated to support luminaire or luminaires and brackets indicated, and securely fastened to pole top. H. Fasteners: Galvanized steel, size and type as determined by manufacturer. Corrosion-resistant items compatible with support components. 1. Materials: Compatible with poles and standards as well as the substrates to which poles and standards are fastened and shall not cause galvanic action at contact points. 2. Anchor Bolts, Leveling Nuts, Bolt Caps, and Washers: Hot-dip galvanized after fabrication unless otherwise indicated. I. Grounding and Bonding Lugs: Welded 1/2-inch threaded lug, complying with requirements in Section 26 05 26 "Grounding and Bonding for Electrical Systems," listed for attaching grounding and bonding conductors of type and size indicated, and accessible through handhole. J. Steps: Fixed steel, with nonslip treads. 1. For climbing positions, install at 15-inch vertical spacing, alternating on opposite sides of pole, oriented 180 degrees from each other; first step shall be at an elevation 10 feet above finished grade. 2. For working positions, install steps on opposite side of pole, oriented 180 degrees from each other at the same elevation. K. Handhole: Oval shaped, with minimum clear opening of 2-1/2 by 5 inches, with cover secured by stainless-steel captive screws. L. Intermediate Handhole and Cable Support: Weatherproof, 3-by-5-inch handhole located at midpoint of pole, with cover for access to internal welded attachment lug for electric cable support grip. M. Cable Support Grip: Wire-mesh type with rotating attachment eye, sized for diameter of cable and rated for a minimum load equal to weight of supported load multiplied by a 5.0 safety factor. N. Platform for Lamp and Ballast Servicing: Factory fabricated of steel, with finish matching that of pole. O. Prime-Coat Finish: Manufacturer's standard prime-coat finish ready for field painting.Galvanized Finish: After fabrication, hot-dip galvanize according to ASTM A 123/A 123M. P. Factory-Painted Finish: Comply with NAAMM's "Metal Finishes Manual for Architectural and Metal Products" recommendations for applying and designating finishes. 1. Surface Preparation: Clean surfaces according to SSPC-SP 1 to remove dirt, oil, grease, and other contaminants that could impair paint bond. Grind welds and polish surfaces to a smooth, even finish. Remove mill scale and rust, if present, from uncoated steel, according to SSPC-SP 5/NACE No. 1 or SSPC-SP 8. 2. Interior Surfaces of Pole: One coat of bituminous paint, or otherwise treat for equal corrosion protection. 3. Exterior Surfaces: Manufacturer's standard finish consisting of one or more coats of primer and two finish coats of high gloss, high-build polyurethane enamel. a. Color: As selected by Engineer from manufacturer's full range. Q. Powder-Coat Finish: Comply with NAAMM's "Metal Finishes Manual for Architectural and Metal Products" recommendations for applying and designating finishes. 1. Surface Preparation: Clean surfaces according to SSPC-SP 1 to remove dirt, oil, grease, and other contaminants that could impair powder coat bond. Grind welds and polish surfaces to a smooth, even finish. Remove mill scale and rust, if present, from uncoated steel, according to SSPC-SP 5/NACE No. 1 or SSPC-SP 8. 2. Powder Coat: Comply with AAMA 2604. a. Electrostatic-applied powder coating; single application and cured to a minimum 2.5-to 3.5-mils dry film thickness. Coat interior and exterior of pole for equal corrosion protection. b. Color: As selected by Engineer from manufacturer's full range. 2.3 ALUMINUM POLES A. Poles: Seamless, extruded structural tube complying with ASTM B 221, Alloy 6061-T6, with access handhole in in pole wall. 1. Shape: Round, straight. 2. Mounting Provisions: Butt flange for bolted mounting on foundation or breakaway support. B. Mast Arms: Aluminum type, continuously welded to pole attachment plate. Material and finish same as plate. C. Brackets for Luminaires: Detachable, cantilever, without underbrace. 1. Adaptor fitting welded to pole, allowing the bracket to be bolted to the pole-mounted adapter, then bolted together with galvanized-steel bolts. D. Cross Section: Tapered oval, with straight tubular end section to accommodate luminaire. Match pole material and finish.Pole-Top Tenons: Fabricated to support luminaire or luminaires and brackets indicated, and securely fastened to pole top. E. Grounding and Bonding Lugs: Bolted 1/2-inch threaded lug, complying with requirements in Section 26 05 26 "Grounding and Bonding for Electrical Systems," listed for attaching grounding and bonding conductors of type and size listed in that Section, and accessible through handhole. F. Fasteners: Galvanized steel, size and type as determined by manufacturer. Corrosion-resistant items compatible with support components. 1. Materials: Compatible with poles and standards as well as to substrates to which poles and standards are fastened and shall not cause galvanic action at contact points. 2. Anchor Bolts, Leveling Nuts, Bolt Caps, and Washers: Hot-dip galvanized after fabrication unless otherwise indicated. G. Handhole: Oval shaped, with minimum clear opening of 2-1/2 by 5 inches, with cover secured by stainless-steel captive screws. H. Prime-Coat Finish: Manufacturer's standard prime-coat finish ready for field painting. I. Aluminum Finish: Comply with NAAMM's "Metal Finishes Manual for Architectural and Metal Products" recommendations for applying and designating finishes. 1. Finish designations prefixed by AA comply with the system established by the Aluminum Association for designating aluminum finishes. 2. Natural Satin Finish: Provide fine, directional, medium satin polish (AA-M32); buff complying with AA-M20 requirements; and seal aluminum surfaces with clear, hard-coat wax. 3. Class I, Clear-Anodic Finish: AA-M32C22A41 (Mechanical Finish: Medium satin; Chemical Finish: Etched, medium matte; Anodic Coating: Architectural Class I clear coating of 0.018 mm or thicker), complying with AAMA 611. 4. Class I, Color-Anodic Finish: AA-M32C22A42/A44 (Mechanical Finish: Medium; Chemical Finish: Etched, medium matte; Anodic Coating: Architectural Class I integrally colored or electrolytically deposited color coating 0.018 mm or thicker), complying with AAMA 611. J. Factory-Painted Finish: Comply with NAAMM's "Metal Finishes Manual for Architectural and Metal Products" recommendations for applying and designating finishes. 1. Surface Preparation: Clean surfaces to comply with SSPC-SP 1 to remove dirt, oil, grease, and other contaminants that could impair paint bond. Grind welds and polish surfaces to a smooth, even finish. Remove mill scale and rust, if present, from uncoated steel, according to SSPC-SP 5/NACE No. 1 or SSPC-SP 8. 2. Interior Surfaces of Pole: One coat of bituminous paint, or otherwise treat for equal corrosion protection. 3. Exterior Surfaces: Manufacturer's standard finish consisting of one or more coats of primer and two finish coats of high-gloss, high-build polyurethane enamel. a. Color: As selected by Engineer from manufacturer's full range. K. Powder-Coat Finish: Comply with NAAMM's "Metal Finishes Manual for Architectural and Metal Products" recommendations for applying and designating finishes. 1. Surface Preparation: Clean surfaces to comply with SSPC-SP 1 to remove dirt, oil, grease, and other contaminants that could impair powder coat bond. Grind welds and polish surfaces to a smooth, even finish. Remove mill scale and rust, if present, from uncoated steel, according to SSPC-SP 5/NACE No. 1 or SSPC-SP 8. 2. Powder coat shall comply with AAMA 2604. a. Electrostatic applied powder coating; single application with a minimum 2.5.to 3.5-mils dry film thickness; cured according to manufacturer's instructions. Coat interior and exterior of pole for equal corrosion protection. b. Color: As selected by Engineer from manufacturer's full range. 2.4 POLE ACCESSORIES A. Duplex Receptacle: Ground-fault circuit interrupter type, 120 V ac, 20 A in a weatherproof assembly. Comply with requirements in Section 26 27 26 "Wiring Devices." 1. Recessed 12 inches above finished grade. a. NEMA 250, Type 4X, nonmetallic polycarbonate plastic or reinforced fiberglass, enclosure with cover; color to match pole. b. Lockable hasp and latch complying with OSHA lockout and tag-out requirements. B. Minimum 1800-W transformer, protected by replaceable fuses, mounted behind access cover. C. Base Covers: Manufacturers' standard metal units, finished same as pole, and arranged to cover pole's mounting bolts and nuts. D. Transformer-Type Base: Same material and color as pole. Coordinate dimensions to suit pole's base flange and to accept ballast(s) and/or indicated accessories. Include removable flanged access cover secured with bolts or screws. 2.5 LOWERING SYSTEM FOR LUMINAIRES A. System Description: Capable of lowering luminaire to a service position within 36 inches of finished grade in winds up to 30 mph. Provide manual plug connection to electrical power accessible in lowered position. Assembled system of pole, luminaire, and lowering device shall be capable of loads specified in "Performance Requirements" Article.Compatibility of Material: Materials for attachment and connection of luminaire-mounting assembly, lowering device, lowering cable, and portable winch shall be compatible to avoid corrosion and electrolysis. B. Structural and Mechanical Design Safety Factor: 5.0, minimum, for static and dynamic loads of load-bearing components, including cable. C. Luminaire-Mounting and Disconnect Arrangement: Multiple ring or carriage-mounted luminaires, arranged for lowering and rising as a group. 1. Electrical cable for normal operating power to luminaires shall manually disconnect inside pole base, using weatherproof multi-pin connector, and shall be arranged to move within the pole during lowering and rising of luminaire assembly. 2. Electrical cable for normal operating power to luminaires shall automatically disconnect at weatherproof multi-pin connector within the pole-top lowering head at the beginning of the lowering cycle and reconnect when luminaire or luminaire assembly is raised to the operating position. D. Lowering Device: Weatherproof, cast-aluminum housing, and multiple mechanical latches. Moving parts of latching assembly shall be located in the portion of the unit that is lowered to servicing position. Positive latching in the operating position shall be indicated to the operator at the base of the pole by a clear visual signal or by other means acceptable to Owner or authorities having jurisdiction. E. Lowering Cable: Zinc-electroplated-or stainless-steel aircraft cable. F. Portable Winch: Manual, if less than 20 foot pole, 120-V electric type, if greater than 20 feet. One required. 1. Winch Power Connection: Cord and plug. 2. Winch Raise-Lower Control: Remote-control station with 15 feet of cable. 2.6 MOUNTING HARDWARE A. Anchor Bolts: Manufactured to ASTM F 1554, Grade 55, with a minimum yield strength of 55,000 psi. 1. Galvanizing: Hot dip galvanized according to ASTM A 153, Class C. 2. Bent rods sized per manufacturer’s recommendation for specified pole and fixture assembly. 3. Threading: Uniform National Coarse, Class 2A. B. Nuts: ASTM A 563, Grade A, Heavy-Hex 1. Galvanizing: Hot dip galvanized according to ASTM A 153, Class C. 2. Four nuts provided per anchor bolt, shipped with nuts pre-assembled to the anchor bolts. C. Washers: ASTM F 436, Type 1. 1. Galvanizing: Hot dip galvanized according to ASTM A 153, Class C. 2. Two washers provided per anchor bolt. 2.7 GENERAL FINISH REQUIREMENTS A. Protect mechanical finishes on exposed surfaces from damage by applying a strippable, temporary protective covering before shipping. B. Appearance of Finished Work: Noticeable variations in same piece are unacceptable. Variations in appearance of adjoining components are acceptable if they are within the range of approved Samples and are assembled or installed to minimize contrast. PART 3 -EXECUTION 3.1 EXAMINATION A. Examine areas and conditions, with Installer present, for compliance with requirements for installation tolerances and other conditions affecting performance of the Work. B. Examine poles, luminaire-mounting devices, lowering devices, and pole accessories before installation. Components that are scratched, dented, marred, wet, moisture damaged, or visibly damaged are considered defective. C. Examine roughing-in for foundation and conduit to verify actual locations of installation. D. Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected. 3.2 POLE FOUNDATION A. Concrete Pole Foundations: Cast in place, with anchor bolts to match pole-base flange. Structural steel complying with ASTM A 36/A 36M and hot-dip galvanized according to ASTM A 123/A 123 M; and with top-plate and mounting bolts to match pole-base flange and strength required to support pole, luminaire, and accessories. Concrete, reinforcement, and formwork are specified in Section 03 30 00 "Cast-in-Place Concrete." B. Pre-Cast Foundations: Factory fabricated, with structural steel complying with ASTM A 36/A 36M and hot-dip galvanized according to ASTM A 123/A 123M; and with top-plate and mounting bolts to match pole-base flange and strength required to support pole, luminaire, and accessories. Concrete, reinforcement, and formwork are specified in Section 03 30 00 "Cast-in-Place Concrete." 1. Power-Installed Screw Foundations: Factory fabricated by pole manufacturer, with structural steel complying with ASTM A 36/A 36M and hot-dip galvanized according to ASTM A 123/A 123M; and with top-plate and mounting bolts to match pole-base flange and strength required to support pole, luminaire, and accessories.Baseplate: Stamped with manufacturer's name, date of production, and cable entry. C. Direct-Buried Foundations: Install to depth indicated on Drawings, but not less than one-sixth of pole height. Add backfill in 6-inch to 9-inch layers, tamping each layer before adding the next. To ensure a plumb installation, continuously check pole orientation with plumb bob while tamping. D. Direct-Buried Poles with Concrete Backfill: Set poles in augered holes to depth below finished grade indicated on Drawings, but not less than one-sixth of pole height. To ensure a plumb installation, continuously check pole orientation with plumb bob while tamping. 1. Make holes 6 inches in diameter larger than pole diameter. 2. Fill augered hole around pole with air-entrained concrete having a minimum compressive strength of 3000 psi at 28 days and finish in a dome above finished grade. 3. Use a short piece of 1/2-inch diameter pipe to make a drain hole through grout. Arrange to drain condensation from interior of pole. 4. Cure concrete a minimum of 72 hours before performing work on pole. E. Anchor Bolts: Install plumb using manufacturer-supplied template, uniformly spaced. 3.3 POLE INSTALLATION A. Alignment: Align pole foundations and poles for optimum directional alignment of luminaires and their mounting provisions on pole. B. Clearances: Maintain the following minimum horizontal distances of poles from surface and underground features unless otherwise indicated on drawing. 1. Fire Hydrants and Water Piping: 60 inches. 2. Water, Gas, Electric, Communications, and Sewer Lines: 10 feet. 3. Trees: 15 feet from tree trunk. C. Concrete Pole Foundations: Set anchor bolts according to anchor-bolt templates furnished by pole manufacturer. Concrete materials, installation, and finishing requirements are specified in Section 03 30 00 "Cast-in-Place Concrete." D. Foundation-Mounted Poles: Mount pole with leveling nuts and tighten top nuts to torque level according to pole manufacturer's written instructions. 1. Use anchor bolts and nuts selected to resist seismic forces defined for the application and approved by manufacturer. 2. Grout void between pole base and foundation. Use nonshrink or expanding concrete grout firmly packed to fill space. 3. Install base covers unless otherwise indicated. E. Use a short piece of 1/2 -inch diameter pipe to make a drain hole through grout. Arrange to drain condensation from interior of pole.Poles and Pole Foundations Set in Concrete-Paved Areas: Install poles with a minimum 6-inch-wide, unpaved gap between the pole or pole foundation and the edge of the adjacent concrete slab. Fill unpaved ring with pea gravel. Insert material to a level 1 inch below top of concrete slab. F. Raise and set pole using web fabric slings (not chain or cable) at locations indicated by manufacturer. 3.4 CORROSION PREVENTION A. Aluminum: Do not use in contact with earth or concrete. When in direct contact with a dissimilar metal, protect aluminum using insulating fittings or treatment. B. Steel Conduits: Comply with requirements in Section 26 05 33 "Raceways and Boxes for Electrical Systems." In concrete foundations, wrap conduit with 0.010-inch-thick, pipe-wrapping plastic tape applied with a 50-percent overlap. 3.5 GROUNDING A. Ground Metal Poles and Support Structures: Comply with requirements in Section 26 05 26 "Grounding and Bonding for Electrical Systems." 1. Install grounding electrode for each pole unless otherwise indicated. 2. Install grounding conductor pigtail in the base for connecting luminaire to grounding system. B. Ground Nonmetallic Poles and Support Structures: Comply with requirements in Section 26 05 26 "Grounding and Bonding for Electrical Systems." 1. Install grounding electrode for each pole. 2. Install grounding conductor and conductor protector. 3. Ground metallic components of pole accessories and foundation. 3.6 IDENTIFICATION A. Identify system components, wiring, cabling, and terminals. Comply with requirements for identification specified in Section 26 05 53 "Identification for Electrical Systems." 3.7 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL A. Special Inspections: Engage a qualified special inspector to perform the following special inspections: 1. Inspect poles for nicks, mars, dents, scratches, and other damage. 2. System function tests. END OF SECTION 